 this is the second in a two - part series on the subject of computer vision . 
 the first part is an introduction to computer vision . 
 the second part is an introduction to convolutional neural networks . 
 the third part is an overview of convolutional neural networks . 
 the fourth part is an introduction to convolutional neural networks .    
 computer vision , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks , convolutional neural networks .   convolution is very similar to a lot of transforms , especially in the compression space . 
 convolution is very similar to a lot of transforms , especially in the compression space . 
 convolution is very similar to a lot of transforms , especially in the compression space . 
 when we think about how to calculate the feature map size , when we think about how to calculate the feature map size , we are going to use the exact same equation that we have here. but now this is just a 1d convolution. we can see how is this computed in one dimension. we can see how is this computed in two dimensions. the idea is going to be similar. but we are going to extend it down to two dimensions. and then we move to 2d which will be images. images of course are two dimensions. and then we move to 2d which will be images. and then we move to 3d which will be canvas . and then we move to 4d which will be images. and then we move to 5d which will be images. and then we move to 6d which will be canvas . and then we move to 7d which will be images. and then we move to 8d which will be images. and then we  this is our society center day hackathon , which is happening the weekend before . if you want to come out , it'll just be an evening on a Friday. if you want to come out , it'll just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it'll just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it will just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it will just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it will just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it will just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it will just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it will just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it will just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it will just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it will just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come out , it will just be an evening on a Friday. and if you want to come