In this chapter, Dr. Rivers explains how to use convolutional and deep learning to learn information in images. He uses a sliding-window technique to capture changes in an image across multiple dimensions while reducing the size of the training set by using weighted weights. This method is particularly useful for large datasets because it can reduce the amount of time that needs to be invested in learning new features. The most important aspect of Convolutional Learning is "learning multiple layers" to behave exactly as identity functions. For example, when you train a neural net on a specific task, it will automatically recognize objects even though they look different from the trained model. As part of this process, we load images into a data-loader so that our model can learn more details during training. In this chapter, the narrator explains how to use convolution to learn more about an image in order to better understand its structure. He also discusses how to apply pooling and convolution techniques to reduce the size of the image as it is being displayed. This technique uses weights to move across the image instead of just moving across one by one. The goal of these two new layers is to learn different kinds of information from the image. They'll be using three-dimensioned convolutions that are going to take place at each node in the network. Each nodes will have their own weights which can be tuned during training. These weights will then be passed on to the other nodes when they build the architecture of the neural network. For example, if all the pixels in the image are covered with a three-by-three-floot filter, then there's no way for the image to get lost. If we set our stride equal to "two times the padding" in the original image, then the feature map will be the same size: "the amount of numbers I'm putting into your layer." That's where things come together. When you start building a Convolutional Neural Grid, however, you need to adjust the number of columns and rows traversed every time you make a change. You might want to increase the efficiency of your system by setting larger filters than you usually do. But even if you were trying to train a completely connected layer, you should still keep track of how many steps you've been taking since you last saw the picture. And so, here's what happens next: Instead of doing multiplication or backpropagating, the entire thing is going to go downsampled. So now that we know how to scale our features, we can see how much smaller In this chapter, the narrator introduces some of the new architectures that will be introduced in the next lecture. The first is an adaptive architecture, which allows the network to learn how to perform different transformations at different points in time. The second is an inception model, which uses convolutions to learn features across multiple layers. The third is a machine learning technique called "transfer learning," which involves using weights to train a specific set of features on a large set of images. The fourth is an image-retrieval technique, which takes advantage of the fact that it can use only one convolution per layer. The final product of the experiment is based on training a pretrained version of the model and then using real world variations to improve its performance.