In this chapter, the narrator introduces several approaches to natural language learning. The first is to tokenize words in order to help us understand them better. The second is to train sentimental models on reviews of different types of documents. The third is to use deep learning to predict future events. The fourth is to apply reinforcement learning to text pre-preparation. In this chapter, the narrator explains how to use tokens to split text in terms of different types of words. He discusses two approaches to natural language processing: back-and forth and lemmatizing. The first is to reduce fruits into their stems so that they can be used as classifiers. The second is to create normalized forms through a Mapping Dictionary. Finally, he introduces a technique called "TfIdf," or term frequency, which uses word frequency to track how important an awards are to a specific document. This approach has some drawbacks, but it allows us to group words together for different applications. Next, we learn about hidden Markov chains, another type of deep learning method. It uses recurrent networks to predict the next word from a set of inputs. In this chapter, the narrator explains some of the best practices for handling imbalanced text-retrieval and sentiment analysis. He discusses how to use "class weights" in his loss function as an alternative to using machine learning to predict future events. He also mentions that they should be careful not to cross-contaminate their splits by source or author because they might have duplicate or duplicate content. The next week's class will focus on topics such as attention and transformer architecture. Alex asks students to spend time brainstorming about their NLP module projects. He tells them that he is going to give a lecture after the meeting so that everyone can go ask questions during the lecture. After the lecture, he announces that if anyone does not submit code or anything else to demonstrate that they have met all the requirements, then he will give it to the students. For the first part of the class, however, there is a discussion about whether or not each student must submit a cheatsheet up for the following week. As usual, though, no one wants to get into the habit of doing something without thinking about it: "I know you are facing off," he says, "that's what your grade is." This conversation continues with a description of how he has been trying to learn robots through scraping information from social media. He admits that when he was working at Space Lake where he used to work, people were talking about Mexico Rancho. But he doesn't want to enter; he just wants to look at other people's things. He feels like he can actually feel rocks and wonders if others have been talking about Mexican rancho.