In this chapter, the focus shifts to attention and how it can be used to learn more about self-awareness, cross-attention, and machine translation. The narrator introduces some of the tools that are being used to train these new types of attention. Self-Awareness: Contextual awareness allows us to better understand what's going on in the world around us. Weighed Sum: This is an example of how we can use weightedsum to train different kinds of attention at different scales. Brain Snack: It's pretty common for people to think they're learning something when really they've just been trying to memorize a piece of text. They don't actually do anything but look at the word "bank" or "bank of the river." Instead, they try to figure out how best to represent the bank by manipulating its size. For example, you might want to know how many times each word is displayed in order to get a sense of how big the bank is. That way, instead of having to remember all the time, you can concentrate on only one thing. In this chapter, the narrator introduces several different types of encoders that can be used to produce new text. The most famous model is Gpt t, which uses an encoder-decoder structure to transform an input sequence into a continuous representation. The decoder's main goal is to use multi-head "attention" to predict which word will be chosen as the next word for each token. He then discusses how the encoder works in terms of its ability to separate out information from what it is actually doing. He also talks about some other architectures that might help you create your own applications. The next week, the UM's hackathon will be held at Duke's. The UM asks Sam to tell him that he got sick two weeks ago and apologizes for being late. He admits that it was because he didn't have time to prepare for the exam two weeks earlier. But he also confesses that if he hadn't been sick last week, he would have been happy that she hadn't gone to see him. This is why he wanted to create a conversational model so that people could understand what they were talking about without having to track down all of the facts in the chatroom. In other words, instead of trying to figure out whether or not there's something fine in the conversation, figuring out how to extract sentiments from the conversation is much more difficult. To answer this question, however, his solution is to use a crowd-controllable algorithm to analyze the entire conversation. Assuming that everyone agrees on some thing, then he suggests that they do whatever they want. For example, "Do whatever you want" means "do whatever you need," while "don't care after" refers to "the fact that are actually actual facts." That way, no one has to worry about getting caught up in the whole conversation.