In this chapter, Anderson introduces the concept of a "neural network," a machine that can approximate a human's decision. He uses a simple neural network to illustrate how it can be used to represent a decision-making boundary in a two-layer model. For example, Rosenblatt describes a fictional story about creating machines with human qualities. The perceptor on the model represents a threshold: if one neuron is present, then the perceptrons are always linear. This means that even though only one nerve can represent an accurate decision, the entire structure of the brain can be represented by a single neuron. Because of the large amount of training data available for deep learning, Neural networks have been trained every three or four months. Deep Learning makes use of more layers to learn complex features from larger datasets. It takes advantage of the fact that each layer has a different set of weights to train. If the loss function is too high, the model will lose all its prediction and become overfitted. Gradient Degradation Methods Time intervals vary according to the size of the training set. A series of regularization techniques are used to improve the performance of the convolutional nervous system. In this chapter, the narrator introduces some of the early developments in machine learning. He discusses the first neural networks that were used to create perceptrons and then describes how they are used to train other types of artificial intelligence. He also gives an example of a game called The Amazing Race where people race across the world doing different tasks at different speeds. In this chapter, the narrator tells us that he's giving up on teaching because he knows what he thinks is "hard to get other." He admits that it's Christmas for him. But he doesn't want to go anywhere else. He wants to start his own research in machine learning. He says he has no idea how to use machine learning to train people and then figure out why they don't learn at all. This is one of the first things he does when he starts working on something.