The goal of machine learning is to create accurate predictions on unseen, unobserved data. In order to do this, we split our training and test sets into two sets: training the model and testing the final model. Each set uses a different set of observations to train the model. For example, when using all of our training data to select features or compare algorithms, we leak information into our model building and influence its performance. We use a cross validation set to validate our model as it moves through the training process. This allows us to see how poorly the model performs in real-world situations. When running the model multiple times with different subsets of observations, each sample has a higher error than the other. To ensure that the model can be used for large datasets, we use an approach called "crossvalidation," which involves selecting samples from several groups instead of only one group at a time. Crossvalidation helps us find the best model complexity so that we can reduce bias and increase generalization performance. It also helps us understand how class imbalances may affect the performance of machines. In this chapter, the UM discusses how they're using machine learning to help students learn more. They've been working on creating a way for students to see their classmates' activity and submit assignments before the deadline so that they don't have to worry about whether or not they can jailbreak someone in the U.S. The UM also talks about some of the cool new features that are being built into the cloud-based teaching platform. For example, they want to show the instructor how many students each student has with Ta and then give them an overview of all the other students in the class. This is very different than any business intelligence tool at least. And it doesn't really matter what kind of assignment you're asked to do. It'll be pretty easy to figure out who's trying to cheat because there's no difference between asking questions and answering them. If anyone wants to know more details, just ask us. In this chapter, Adam explains the importance of cross-validating his final model to ensure that it performs as well as the training set. He also discusses how to use the test set to determine the on-bax performance of the final model. The goal of this program is to help students develop an understanding of the different types of features and algorithms that will ultimately lead to the best solution for their particular problem. For example, if they have 625 features in their model, they are going to have more complexity than other algorithms because they have so many features. If they have too many features, however, they tend to make slight changes in the training data which do not cause large changes in their predictions. This causes them to have "a scattershot effect" where all of sudden little making small changes don't result in big changes in your predictions. As the model becomes more complicated, it becomes harder to find the sweet spot where there is as low error as possible.