In this chapter, Dr. Rivers explains how machine learning can be used to predict future events in real-world situations. He uses a model to predict home price, safety incidents, and product demand from a dataset that has been collected by the Jet Propulsion lab. The goal of machine learning is to learn without explicitly being programmed. Machine learning involves building an accurate prediction on unsupervised or unsupervisedly collected data using a fibitset of numbers. This class will focus on "machine learning," which involves understanding how machines work and making predictions with them. It'll also cover some practical applications for machine learning, such as predicting market conditions rather than just guessing what people should buy. Dr. Rushett introduces his students to machine learning methods: modeling process and algorithms; interpreting results; involving domain experts; publicizing the results; and getting the most out of them. For example, we might use machine learning to predict the daily sale at the university store instead of building our own model. We need to interpret the results to guess what target variables would have been when we built amodel. To build a better model, however, it must be trained on different sets of observations. If you want to test your model before training it again, you first split the training set into two sets so that all samples are randomly sampled. Sampling takes place at multiple points during the training period to ensure that none of the samples fall into groups where other samples may fall into various groups. A sampling method allows us to select samples from several types of population including convenience sampling, random sampling, convenience sampling, and stratified sampling. Each sample is assigned a weight that determines the probabilities of being selected. So each sample is chosen according to three goals: Interpretability performance Computational cost Algorithmas Selection Performance versus Interpretability Predicting whether you have cancer but you have to In this chapter, Anderson explains the new homework policy and how students will be expected to submit their homework assignments in time for class. He also introduces a new competition called the "Kaggle Competition," which is open to anyone who can create a machine-learning model that predicts daily high temperatures. The winner of the competition will receive an actual cash prize from the top of his class. As part of the course, Anderson plans to give students two weeks to attend class and one week to prepare for their final exam. If they miss more than two classes, they will have to excuse those absences. However, if they show up late or miss too much, they are allowed to do whatever they want as long as they stay in class. After the end of class, however, all students must take quizzes and write code. Each student will have three different tasks to complete: writing code, analyzing the result of the code, and explaining something to him. In this chapter, the UM uses machine learning to predict future power outages from historical weather forecasts. The UM's use of machine learning allows him to build a prediction-based model that predicts where power will be most likely to go in the future. He then discusses how machine learning can help solve real-world problems by predicting where people are likely to run into trouble.