Next week: Attention & Transformers. Code tutorial for applications in main libraries: NLP libraries: BERT, GPT, SpaCy, NLP-Tagging, and TensorFlow. Theoretically there is not a token limit. The complexity of calculating attention scores is quadratic. Long sequences may become less efficient on longBatch size and sequence length. There is a trade-off between batch size and token limit to increase token limits. The transformers library has 3 building blocks: A tokenizer, a transformer architecture, and a head for NLP taskse.g Text Classification, Generation, Sentiment Analysis, Translation, Summarization. In canvas you will find a code tutorial. So we've talked primarily about self-attention so far. Now we're going to actually start talking about the transformer architecture then and how intention gets incorporated in. So we've got basically the values, keys and queries here. We have multiple of these linear layers as weight matrices. Allows you to train more weights and to learn more. There's two different parts to our transformer architecture. Bidirectional encoder representations from transformers. Are decoder only models are designed to generate text. Then where our decoders are going to attend to our encoder outputs. And this creates a direct information pathway between our input and your output. The attention is the same whether you're in an encoder and decoder. Attention is what allows us to weigh the relevance of each surrounding word to determine the most appropriate meaning of orange in that specific context. There is a complexity involved in calculating attention scores, and it is quadratic with respect to the sequence of life length. Anything that you can imagine how you would be able to tokenize you can use a transformer. So you can make images spectrograms of speech, audio time series, video. So this is Vit or Vision Transformer came out in 2020. We'll talk about transformer uses in recommendation systems. FlashAttention solution: rewrites CUDA kernel to use TILING (process attention in small blocks) Never materializes full n x n attention matrix in HBM (GPU memory) Computes same result but with O(n) memory!! 2-4x wall-clock speedup on A100 GPUs. Facebook/bart-large-cnn is fine-tuned on CNN/DailyMail news summarization. BART uses the same masked language modeling objective as BERT for both its encoder and decoder during pretraining, which is why it performs well on both classification and generation tasks.