In this chapter, the narrator introduces several of the most important NLP applications and approaches. He uses a variety of techniques to help understand how words are represented in terms of their different meanings. These include tokenization, which divides text into lists of sentences; stop words, which remove words from the list; and stemming, which reduces words to an actual word. This chapter also discusses some of the challenges that face natural language learning. For example, it is difficult to predict future weather because of the large number of words in a single document. Neural networks can be used to model these problems. In this chapter, the narrator introduces two approaches to natural language processing: back and forth, where each word is counted as frequency of one word. The first approach uses Naive bayes, a sentiment-classifier that can be used in many different applications; the second approach uses Markov chains, based on a set of probabilities that predict future weather. This technique works well because it takes into account the context of the individual's conversation. However, traditional approaches do not take into account "context information," which may not be required for text clustering or text categation. Instead, they focus on using recurrent networks to learn how words are encoded. In this chapter, the narrator explains how he uses machine learning to help him create new content. He also discusses his desire to use an artificial intelligence to learn more about the world. He feels that if he could just write and then collaborate with someone else, he would be able "to like get like" -- that is, make things easier for him. This conversation continues in which the speaker tells the audience that he does not know how to code because he has been working on the project for six months. He says that it is very hard to do anything until he understands how to program. He admits that when he was working on these projects, there were no rushes or interruptions. He adds that even though he did not read the 2005 version of the language, a lot had changed since then. He notes that people are starting to talk about Mexico Rancho as if they were talking about other people. He asks if anyone has seen the top five messages from Mexico--that's why he thinks so highly of them. The narrators agree that their focus should be similar to your own world. They decide to buy some beer and discuss how they can have interesting ideas about how they might want to approach life differently. In this chapter, the UM discusses several approaches to reducing the size of his machine learning code. He uses "t-Se" to reduce the number of dimensions that can be reduced down to three. The first approach is using cosin similarity, an invariant measure of the distance between two vector objects. The second approach uses Manifold Learning, a nonlinear reduction technique used to understand the structure and shape of our data. This method also uses manifled learning to predict what will happen when the same set of information is shared with another set of objects. These methods are especially useful for large language models because they have so many relative relationships. For example, one company had been working on a project where they were trying to evaluate their artificial intelligence systems. They were having difficulty setting thresholds due to the fact that cosine similarities are relative. Um, okay, now we'll talk about how you can use retrieval augmentation generation to find the nearest match between your product and your customer's question. You get exactly the same model from which you create constructor maps. Each chunk of unstructured content is given different sets of values. So each item is given based on its own value. If you run experiments to figure out whether or not your results are correct, then you have to decide how you want to evaluate them: Are you doing something answer app or do some kind ofproduct search what youEmbed and Chunk What chunks you Embed are going to Look different depending on whatever application is,and you might need To determine how you've got to evaluate these experiments. And then How do you knowwhat you're Out if your outcome is correct? Okay, so here's the curse of assessment: When you change pieces, you must reevaceate. But there's not always a best decision to make; it's important to consider all of