In this chapter, the narrator explains how to use tokens to train a machine learning model. He uses a stopword reduction technique to remove words that "add little value" to the understanding of sentences or documents. The narratator then discusses two different types of training: full fine tuneing and frozenbackbone. Full fine tuneting trains all task-specific elements while frozen back bone trains only tasks specific. Gradual un freezing involves training earlier layers in order to prevent sudden disruption of pre-training weights and stability. This chapter also introduces several other NLP libraries, including Huggingface's Transformers, which are used for applications like classification, summarization, topic modeling, and multimodal modeling. In this chapter, the UM discusses his experiments with Andrew. He has an idea for a project that would involve using machine vision to learn how people can see things in the real world. The UM also talks about how he is tired and wants to be more of a robot. He drives to Ram Bradford where he doesn't understand who uploaded the code on the data set that hasn't been used with it. He feels like he needs some sort of pairage because he didn't realize that this was a vector-to-sequence problem. They decide they want to use the "vision" language so they can make their work up to help other people like him. This is why they decided to take the program up to German instead of English. It turns out that Jared himself had a very similar method: he wanted to create realism from the original source of information. But now he knows that there are two options: 1) do you want to be in graphic card or 2) do you just want something interesting to look at. Uh yes, I wish it was kind of like roughly the name approximate. Um, what does you mean by "the most popular post actually like." How would you know that even when I saw someone put SSL decipheron?" Um, no, not exactly what I was talking about. And then again, we have another question: What's doing for now? Can I detect it? Yeah, yeah, right? Yes, okay, thanks. We get back to the topic of the experimentation. The first thing he asks is whether he should go to 2018, but if he wants to start immediately, he will only need to copy the current address into the scraper. If he chooses to run away, thwarted by the fact that he won't find anything important anymore, she says In this chapter, the narrator explains how to use machine learning to predict future events in real time. He describes his own model, GPT 2, which was trained to predict the following word in 40 GB of text. The next day, he shows that it has been seven years since the release of GPT2, and that it is now used for market research. He also tells about another model, called Bert T1, which uses an expert-to-expert communication process to train robots. This new approach uses "mixed experts" to learn more about the task at hand.