[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Yeah, I didn't know that. Except for that hybrid question.

Because that's what you don't like. You. Know.

So like, whenever you are talking, you know, I can't hear things like that.

Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah yeah.

Oh, yeah. Yeah. That's kind of hard to get because I.

See it. I like our class more than nothin.

All right. How's everyone's rate? I have to quit my terrible, terrible, great.

Cause I was doing I work. Wow. That is a dedicated student.

Did anybody do anything fun? Come on.

What did you do for fun? I went to my friend's wedding in Spain.

Oh. In Spain. Where? In Spain? Um, Madrid. Uh, I love Madrid.

It's beautiful. Very nice. All right, that's a job.

Anybody can talk that into Madrid. My friend is doing a year long fellowship in the Dominican Republic.

So I want to go visit her there. Oh, wow. Were you there during the Venezuela?

No. Okay. No, we made it up. Well. That's good.

That's good. Yeah. I know somebody who is in Puerto Rico and couldn't get out for, like, a week so that you can get there before.

Who else would you do for fun? I see some dolphins and do a kayak in Tampa.

Oh, wow. I saw some dolphins in Tampa. Very nice.

We probably crossed paths. I was there when I was in Orlando last week.

Not seeing dolphins, sea land animals and humans.

Anything else? Anyone do something that was kind of boring, but they were really happy to be, like, just doing something boring, like sleeping.

Oh, yeah. Right. I mean, you don't sleep all semester, so it's nice to.

And then you're not going to sleep at all this spring semester. Okay.

Yeah. Well, I want you to be sleeping even though we have this class.

So you guys got to keep you posted on how things are going, right?

Because I only know you when you're in my classes. I don't know what's going on in capstone.

I don't know what's going on in all your other classes, but you got.

So you got to keep me posted on what's going on, because this is the one shared class we have together.

So we need to shift some things around. You guys got to tell me okay.

Yeah. Let me know that.

Hey, it'd be really great if we did presentations this day, but not everything was due today because we also have this huge thing for capstone, too.

So keep me posted on what you guys knew this semester, because we're going to make it to the end of this semester,

and a lot of you are going to be graduating after the summer.

It's kind of crazy, sad and bittersweet, but then some of you are going to be returning next semester and you'll have to deal with me again.

All right, so this is deep learning applications.

And let's jump into a few of the things that we're going to be talking about this semester.

So originally when I joined the program they covered three topics computer vision,

natural language processing not including anything generative and then recommendation systems.

And so when I joined, I was like, well, generative AI is starting to become really important.

So I added a module on generative AI.

And then also Stuart was there last semester when I revamped and added a bunch of large language models to up to NLP.

So you're going to get a lot more generative stuff.

And people had a few years ago, I think we're probably familiar with this, but in case you're not computer vision, anything with images and videos,

anything that you see will be in computer vision all about text is going to be natural language processing and then recommending stuff in content.

So you go on Amazon and they recommend you something that is going to be our recommendation systems.

And then generative systems are in images creating something from random noise and modeling different probability distributions.

And then talk about all that good stuff this semester. So some a few examples from computer vision.

Uh, from object Detection and classification, which are two application threats.

What about, uh, smart doorbells that tell you when a specific person is there?

Um, smart doorbells are really fun because you can tag people, so you can tag people and say, what are their names?

And this is really fun because when you're in a home with multiple people, you can go in and just change people's names.

So, um, I when my husband and I first moved into the house, I changed his name to Bob.

So every time he was walking outside, I would say, Bob is, you know, on the front porch or Bob is by the garage.

And then after a little while and he was just very confused, like, why? And he went in and he would change it to his name.

Right. And I was going back and change it to Bob. And then after a while, uh, that got kind of, uh, boring.

So I changed his name to Kevin. And so it was Kevin for a while, and then, uh, I changed his name to Stuart.

And if you're if, you know, the minions movies, I'm just changing it to all the new names.

And so he's he's still on Stuart. Um, but he eventually did figure it out once I put him on Stuart, that he was, um.

Actually, I was the one going in the changing room. So smart doorbell is computer vision.

We're going to talk all about, uh, these types of applications. Vacuum robots.

Anybody here have a vacuum robot at home? All right.

Yeah, a couple people have them at home. Um, I have one at home.

Uh, lovingly called dumpling. Uh, we used to have one that was called Dash Brown.

Uh, these are the reason that I tell people when I give talks that I'm not worried about

any Terminator type situation happening because they are not very good at their job.

You're running into stuff all the time. You're just going in and just like running into the wall.

It's just like. They're like.

And I just keep running into the wall. So I'm not too worried about AI taking over anytime soon,

but we're going to talk about how we can improve these and make them better using, uh, more modern object detection methods.

Uh, this one is really cool. So I'm going to play this video here. So this is actually harvesting, uh, grapes.

And so this is a robotic system, and it's using computer vision to tell where these grapes are and to be able to harvest them.

I mean, how cool is that? Right? That's like. So awesome.

I think these are grapes. Are these Kiwi and I.

I think the kiwi. Oh, man. I've been seeing grapes all these years.

Um, and then, uh, manufacturing ergonomics.

If anyone in here is really interested in going into manufacturing, there is a huge need for computer vision,

um, in manufacturing, especially if we think about, like, who's estimation, uh,

when there's a lot of challenges in manufacturing because people doing a lot of repetitive jobs and then they have a lot of ergonomic problems,

health problems, they can't return to work worker's comp.

And so there's a lot of, uh, startups out there now that are doing pose estimation using computer vision,

because there's already cameras in these factories.

So could you use computer vision and doing pose estimation to see when somebody is doing too many repetitive movements,

or maybe when they don't have a hard hat on and they could be at risk of getting their head smashed by one of these machines.

In NLP. Um, if you've used any plagiarism checkers, um, that would be um, a form of NLP called text similarity.

We're going to talk about that this semester. We're going to talk about machine translation.

So any translation system that you use uh will use natural language processing of course.

Generation of text. I think we are all, uh, pretty familiar with this.

Is deep learning. But deep learning can definitely be fun.

I love that answer. Searching online.

So this is where we get both natural language processing and recommendation systems.

Because when you are searching online, you're both doing some kind of text processing, but you're also making a recommendation, right?

You're ranking those results before I mode and all of that.

You still have to provide a recommendation of which one should be first, or at least which one should be first after the ads.

Should we all hear something? And now you're stuck with the seats at the front.

Oh, well that's fine. But don't worry. You've got your coffee, right?

Yeah. Shopping recommendations.

So all kinds of shopping recommendations. Everything from books to baby wipes to clothes.

We're pretty much inundated with recommendation systems all of the time.

Social media content connections, all of that.

So everything from ECS to TikTok to LinkedIn to dating apps.

This is all driven by recommendation systems. These are huge.

And then content platforms. So other platforms you might be on on a weekly basis, daily basis.

YouTube, Spotify, Netflix. They are doing an immense amount of recommendation systems there.

We're actually going to do a case study on Netflix when we get to the recommendation system later this semester,

but we're going to go in depth into a few of the different recommendation algorithms they use.

They actually use dozens of recommendation algorithms at Netflix.

All right. Questions on the topics. Anything missing?

We've got this week to add it. Right away.

Linear regression. Linear regression. So here's our course timeline.

It's pretty tight. So we've got computer vision. This is going to be.

So today we're going to do an intro to neural networks which should be review for you all.

But it might you might hear it a little bit differently. And so you might be like oh okay now I understand this a little bit better.

So we'll do that today. And now we're going to spend a few weeks on computer vision.

Um, next we're going to go to natural language processing. We're going to spend a few weeks on natural language processing.

We're going to spend a couple weeks on recommendation systems and have some overlap with generative AI.

Uh, and do, uh, a session on generative AI. And throughout all of this is your individual project.

So this is all looming in the background. Um, and we'll talk about the individual project in just a few minutes.

And I here, that's me.

That's graduation or quasi graduation, because you still have to pass the courses in the summer, which, as far as I know, only one person has failed.

So I'm sure you all get it. All right.

So let's go through the syllabus.

The syllabus is going to look pretty similar to our syllabus from last semester uh, with a few modifications that I want to talk about.

Oh before we get there. Yes. Teaching assistant Stuart, do you want to introduce yourself?

Let me pull up your slide. You all know me, but I don't know if everyone here knows Stuart, so want him to introduce himself.

Yeah. Hi, everyone. I'm sure I'm, uh. Well, I, I run track, and I also in this program, so I'm really interested in, like, the sports,

and I, uh, I'm, like, borderline obsessed with, um, like, tracking and quantifying movement.

Um, I the whole thing. Start ups. I run my own startup, and, uh, we have things in ML, like out of the box ideas.

I love one of those. Um, and I was also a neuroscience undergrad, so, uh, I love talking about, like,

uh, similarities and differences between human brains and computer brains.

I'm sorry. I don't want to call. Um, and then this was just, uh, me with, like, a monument to Alan Turing.

Uh, 100 points. But anyone who can tell me why this is. Are you giving out bonus points like that?

There's only a thousand points in London is not good.

That's a good catch. You guys give me a t shirt. Exactly. Manchester, UK.

It's not in the United Kingdom. It is.

On the west coast. It is San Francisco.

Right. It's in, uh, it's in Hay Ashbury where they have, uh, they have a bus, an equivalent of a Walk of Fame.

But for gay people, I'm not so sure as well.

Yeah. Um, and that was the summer.

That was that I was last October. Last October? Yeah.

Um, quick note about this, cause, like, it is hard.

There's no getting around it, but, like, it should be because it's like 70 years of research into,

like, you know, humanity's greatest target compressed into three months.

So don't be surprised. It is hard, but lean into it. Um, you know, it makes the content exciting a lot.

Um, but, yeah, just kind of prepare yourself, uh, difficult concepts.

That's my best advice. Oh, right.

So come see Stuart if you need any help. He's going to be around.

[INAUDIBLE] be coming to our hackathon days for our next hackathon day.

I don't think we'll be in class every time, but he will be here during our, um, events office hours.

I'm kind of I have like, quite a lot of availability, so. Who's free on Thursdays.

Hands up. Just like all day.

That's our. That's our cups. You guys know that when your classes are so, like, what days work best?

Thursday is our capstone class. Okay, so not Thursday. I'm sorry.

Monday and Friday. Monday. Friday. Okay. What times?

We wanted to show them out. Saturday Sunday Friday.

Man the light. Three. Perfect.

And after my office hours. And so when they're confused by me, they can go and see you.

It sounds good. Awesome. I got used to it.

Come on. All right.

This is actually the first time our class of 78, which is pretty exciting because usually we don't have returning folks in the spring semester.

When I heard Stuart was sticking around, I was like, well, I'm going to have to year this year.

So I was very excited. All right. So let's see.

We've got this is going to look pretty familiar.

We have of course GitHub repo. Um, this is going to have a bunch of tutorials on pretty much everything that we're going to talk about in the class.

And so we've got a whole code resource there. And so, you know, we're not going to do a bunch of code demos in class.

I don't find them super effective to just go through things in class.

And so they're all those code demos are there for you to pour over for you to put into ChatGPT and get it to evaluate and look over for you to update,

um, your kind of thought process on. And so all of that is in our GitHub repo.

Uh, there is an optional textbook.

So you are the kind of person that really likes to do proofs and you really like to read about, you know, deep theory.

And I would highly recommend this deep learning book.

I'm going to in canvas, you'll see that I'll kind of tell you which chapters are going along with, um, some of our, uh, stuff in class.

Um, so optional text, but not required. Um, most of the assignments here are going to require access to a GPU.

You guys should be the class that is most familiar with GPUs by this point, which is great.

So we talked about them in 510. I think you got into them a little bit in 520.

Um, so hopefully you have some kind of comfort level with at least accessing the GPU.

Um, Google has granted each of you $50 in compute credits.

Those go fast, but everybody in here has $50 in computer credits.

You can use those for your projects with your teams.

You can pool money together. You can use them for your individual projects, whatever you want.

But each of you has $50. Um, and the information for that is in canvas, which I'm going to show you.

Um, let's see. And then canvas. Canvas is pretty much what we use for communication.

So we'll send out announcements and canvas.

And then you're going to see all of the course material there in canvas, which we'll go through in just a minute.

Um, we also tend to use the API discord server more in this class.

So if you took HCI with me, you know, kind of the level of communication on the Xdai discord,

we kind of just moved over to the API discord for this particular class.

So I'll set up a channel if we haven't set it up already. Um, and that channel will be used just for general communication for this class.

So ask questions there, especially questions that you're asking in the WhatsApp.

Just put them in the discord. And then Stuart I can answer those for you.

All right. So of course grading. So we got 25% of the coarse grade is going to be the computer vision module.

Um, and this year I'm doing something a little bit differently.

So you might have noticed our three trophies up here. So.

We have three modules that we're going to have hackathons in.

These are going to be in class in person.

Um, you are going to work for two hours on some small project that is related to computer vision or natural language processing,

or is going to be related to generative AI. Now, the idea here is that for computer vision and NLP, you can roll this into your module project.

So you could go work with the same team that you're working on for the module project, and you'll work on a piece of that in class.

So did you have a good starting point to then finish your project around?

And there will be winners, of course.

So at the end of each hackathon for your piece, you'll get up here and do like a 1 to 2 minute pitch of what you guys accomplished.

And because this is a democracy, we are all going to vote on which team is going to win the trophy for each of our hackathons.

These hackathons are going to occur on January 27th, so the first one is in two weeks from today on computer vision.

Um, and then going to happen again March 3rd.

That's going to be right before spring break. And then uh, March 31st is going to be our generative AI one.

You have a module project? Um, for each of these as well?

Uh, not for generative AI, but for recommendation systems, NLP and computer vision.

You're going to have a team project. The team project is going to be 2 to 3 people on that team project.

So if I'm 2 to 3 people to work with on this project, and then you'll see here, uh, 10%, um, is going to be your computer vision assessment.

So the assessment can take many forms. I think Stuart's class had some challenges.

And so we did exams for each of those.

But if we don't have challenges on the first assessments and they go really well, then we won't have to do exams for every assessment.

Okay. So if you work really hard in that first one, we will have an easier time later in the semester.

So some motivation there. I'm pretty sure I gave the same motivation to Stuart's class, so teamwork didn't work.

Stuart always did great though. He always got 100, so of course.

Uh. Let's see. And then, um, so that's all the modules.

And then the 20% is your final course project. This is done individually.

So each person will craft over the course of the semester or the one week before the end of the class.

You guys will put together a course project. Now, these course projects are pretty cool because they often lead to jobs.

Uh, for example, a couple of years ago, um, somebody did a movie recommendation system for their individual final project,

and then they got hired by TikTok because it it. So you can really craft these to try to get that job that you want afterwards,

or maybe even if you have a job already, that job you want three years down the road, right?

That job that now you have this really nice project that you can show, or maybe, like Stewart, you will roll it into a startup that you start.

All right. So of course, schedule wise we've got into neural networks today.

We're going to do CNNs transfer learning data augmentation.

Next week. We'll do an in-class hackathon and then we'll do computer vision applications.

That's pretty much going to cover a bunch of other computer vision stuff.

We'll do our module assessment and module project presentations on the same day.

So we'll have, uh, project presentations. These will be very short and pitch like for your teams.

And then we'll do our assessment. Similarly NLP is going to be week six.

We're going to do an overview of NLP applications a deep dive.

Then we'll do it in class hackathon right before spring break. We'll head out to spring break.

Not think about any of this stuff, and then we'll come back and give presentations and have our module assessment.

March 24th. We're getting to the end of the semester here, right. So we're going to have our generative deep learning lecture.

We'll do our generative AI in class hackathon the following week. And we're gonna wrap up this semester by doing a lecture on recommendation systems

and our module assessment and module project presentations recommendation systems.

The last day of class is going to be April 21st. That is Demo day.

That is where you all come here and you present your final projects to one another.

And we usually live stream that so you can have family and friends stream as well.

I will talk to Amanda about trying to get a bigger room. So if you have local friends and family, we could get them to come to the class.

So I will talk to Amanda about trying to get a room for that. All right.

Questions so far. All right.

We're going to talk about this stuff in just a minute when we talk about this.

Let's see. Uh, one thing that has changed is my policy on using AI resources.

I'd like to give you guys a really good reason for a change in the policy,

other than I was just really sick of dealing with having to go back and forth with people about the AI policy.

So I policy on using AI resources this semester is I'm going to assume you're using some kind of generative AI for your assignments,

whether that's cursor or whether that's ChatGPT. Your assignments this semester have been appropriately scaled as a result.

So everything you will do in this class has been scaled such that it is much harder than students here.

Um, but I'm going to be assuming that you are using these tools.

So they should still you should still be able to do them.

I still recommend getting in the habit of citing your AI resources, but points are not going to be taken off,

and we are not going to be assessing whether or not you use AI resources in the class.

Stuart, what else do you use? Which ones do I use for coding?

I typically use cursor, but most of the coding that I do now, um, is mostly web development to create new tools and interactive elements.

I have heard that cloud code is probably the best, but I cannot assess that because I have not used it since the summer and the summer was crap.

Stuart, which one do you like the best? I do like to look at the best.

Okay. Yeah. I'm curious what you mean by like, more challenging than last year.

Like, is that in terms of, like how much time you expect this to spend on it, like theoretical or.

It's a wonderful question. I am going to pull up the canvas now and we'll go through it together.

All right. Let's go ahead and take a look at these assignments.

All right. So your projects, they're all going to look the exact same.

They're just going to say up here I underlined computer vision.

It will be underlined NLP or will be underlined recommendation systems.

But everything else is the exact same. Um one note here.

You may not reuse a project you are already working on for another course,

prior research or your job, so this project must be new work developed specifically for the course.

This is not the case for the individual project.

So for example, if you are working on a startup and for your individual project, you want to do some of your startup for that, that is totally fine.

However,

you can't do anything that was worked on with a team and now go solo and rely on a lot of that foundation because it gets a little bit messy there,

similar to IP in the real world. Okay, so here we go.

So we have three modeling approaches. This is the same as last year.

So you have to create a naive baseline model. Now when I say a naive model people get really confused by this.

So this is the time to to think okay.

And then focus in I'm saying something really basic, not something that, you know, you have to think very deeply about thinking like,

you know, you're doing a mean prediction, you're just predicting the mean, or you're doing a majority class classifier.

So you have, you know, all of this training data and you have, I don't know, 100 rabbits and you have 50 goats.

You are going to just predict the majority class, which is rabbits.

You're also going to create a classical non deep learning machine learning model for your project.

So this is to compare against your deep learning approach. Sometimes a classical approach works better than the deep learning approach.

And that actually happens quite a bit in this class. So you're going to create a classical non deep learning machine learning model.

Think linear logistic regression random forest gradient boosting SVMs,

anything that you pretty much learned in John's class except for neural networks you can apply here.

And then finally you're going to do your neural network based deep learning model.

And so you're going to have all three of these. And now you only have to deploy one of them.

So you get to choose which one you deploy. Sam.

So this might be a stupid question, but let's just say, like you're theoretically for your computer vision,

you want to count the difference between like, cows, rabbits or whatever, right?

How would you like.

I'm just saying, theoretically, how would you build, like a classical model if it's the whole like premise is computer vision, right?

Because like, like I'm just saying, like, you know what I mean? Like, don't worry, we're actually going to talk about that.

So next week we're going to talk about some traditional approaches for computer vision.

Okay. I know it sounds crazy, but you can actually do computer vision classically.

It's not done very often because it's not very good.

However, you all are going to do it in this class so that you recognize why we do deep learning models.

And how challenging it is to do a classical approach to computer vision.

Yeah. Great question. All right.

You choose one of these for your final deployed model, but all of them have to be in your code repository that you're going to submit for the project.

All right. This part is new. All right. Required experimentation.

You have to conduct at least one focused experiment that probes your modeling choices.

So you can do a sensitivity analysis looking at a varying your training set size and looking at the performance.

So those evaluation metrics, you could do some kind of robustness testing.

So you could do a noise injection or a distribution shift and see how well your model does.

Um on robustness you could compare different preprocessing pipelines.

You could do ablation studies. You could do any other experiments that are going to result in something meaningful to develop and test your system.

And your experiment should be well motivated, clearly described, and properly implemented.

All right. Next you have an interactive application component.

So your project has to include a working, interactive proof of concept application that's publicly accessible via the internet.

Why? For at least one week after submission and running a model inference only.

So don't do any training in the app. I don't want to sit there for ten minutes while your model trains in the app.

Okay, you're just running inference on that. You can use any front end or deployment framework that you want.

Flask, Streamlit, dash. You can do whatever you want here.

Um, but it has to be publicly accessible via a link that myself and Stuart can access for up to one week after.

Yeah. So make it clear we don't need to do anything with Docker. Again, I like having the user be able to run it on their own.

You do not have to do anything with Docker unless you want more skills with Docker.

And you can incorporate into your project if you wish. There are some like replicate.

It's often they have like a Docker like container that you can put models in, but you are not required to do it.

All right, this is new UX actually matters this time.

Because if nobody wants to use your crappy application, well then they're not going to use it.

So this year, uh, a minimal or poorly designed interface is going to be penalized.

This is a product level proof of concept. I want you to think this is a startup that I'm trying to get funding for, and it has to look the part.

Not going to be some, you know, kind of simple. Streamwood app.

Uh, not going to cut it. So think about the UX.

Think about how to implement this using your generative AI code tools of choice.

And you know, spend some time on it because it does matter.

And it does matter what people's perception of you and your level of work is.

All right. If the app does not run when you and I are breathing, you're going to receive a zero for that portion of the project.

Really important because we're going through and trying to grade all of it at one time.

Um, and part of the reason that we try to grade all of it at one time is so that we're not biased, right?

We have the where we're coming in. We're saying, okay, we're going to do all of the grading now.

So we don't have these biases of, oh, you know, I just had a pizza and I'm tired versus, you know, maybe I just had a salad and I'm still tired.

Right. Uh, but if regardless, we, we try to do it all at one time and we really don't want to have to go back and do that.

So our pasta run. Think of it like this.

If it's an investment investor demo, if it doesn't work, it's not going to get funded.

So I want you to think about that for this. What that might mean, especially if you use something like Streamlit and Streamlit,

has some challenges, as you may want to go in and just check it every day for that week.

So just set yourself a little reminder.

Someone on your team set a little reminder, and then just go and check it every morning and make sure that it's still running.

All right. So the goal of this project is to create some kind of unique contribution to solving a problem.

Uh, that's outside are beyond what somebody has done previously.

There's different options for this. You can work on a data set or problem for which there has not been previous modeling approaches.

Um, you could create a new test, uh, text data set.

Um, you could create a new data set, just like you.

Um, did some of that in, um, in five, ten.

Uh, and so you can do all that. Um, alternatively, you can choose an existing data set or problem that others have worked on.

But you have to do something new or novel in your approach.

It doesn't have to be more accurate than the previous approaches, but it has to be improved in robustness,

for example, or it has to be improved in some way, or maybe it's more efficient, whatever it may be.

Maybe it's more explainable, right? Whatever it is, you have to do something additional beyond what's already available out there on the internet.

All right. Project deliverables. This is new. Um, you're going to have a written report.

Remember, you can use generative AI tools for this, uh, written report.

Uh, you're going to submit it in one of the following formats. You're going to do a NeurIPS or icMl style research paper.

And you can look up the format for those. You can do a white paper.

And so you can also look up the formats for white paper or technical report.

These all are pretty similar as they have. But you're going to pick one of those formats and you're going to submit a written report in that format.

It has to include the following sections problem statement data sources, related work evaluation strategy and metrics.

Really important here for justification.

Just like in 510, I want you to justify and provide rationale for why you choose to do a particular evaluation strategy.

Are you going to talk about your modeling approach, your data processing pipeline with rationale for each step?

Uh, your hyperparameter tuning strategy, the different models you evaluated and why you chose each of those models.

Your results.

You are required to have a quantitative comparison across models and metrics, as well as visualizations, uh, confusion matrices where appropriate.

Uh, you need to do an error analysis.

You need to identify five specific mis predictions and try to explain the root causes of those, and propose mitigation strategies.

And then you're going to write up that experiment that we talked about as well. All right.

Finally, you're going to do conclusions. Future work. What would you do if you had another semester to work on the project?

A commercial viability statement. Is this commercially viable?

Is it suitable for real world or commercial commercial use?

Why or why not? And then. Ethics statement. The second deliverable is an in-class pitch.

This is going to be really fun, right? We're going to come in here and spend five minutes just sharing what we did for our project.

The motivation for it, it'll be just a really fun time to learn about some of the techniques that other people used in the class.

And then your code and deployment.

So submitting a link to your GitHub repository with your full code base, as well as a live deployed web or mobile application like.

And then of course, following best practices like we talked about in 510, including PR's made by each team member and good peer reviews made.

That should be made on each PR by other team members prior to merging code into the main branch.

So follow me. Get best. Practice is really important. Uh, Stuart's class had a lot of problems with this one.

You guys are going to be better, right? Stuart, I'm just picking on you like you're a representative of your entire class, and I feel so bad for you.

I think I remember this specific. Yeah, yeah.

And then so I was like, I'm going to give you guys a chance to redeem yourselves for your grades.

But all you guys have to do is just have PR reviews by every person on your teams.

Didn't happen. Yeah, they're there for us.

Didn't get many trophies, but this class got a lot of trophies, right?

Every PR has to be reviewed by everyone else or no.

Every PR has to be reviewed by someone. But then everybody on a team has to have at least one PR review.

Yeah, yeah. And then typical code quality things, right?

Don't give me crappy code, please. I want to look through it.

Okay. So that's that's what we're going to do for each of the assessments.

And then your individual project is going to look pretty much the exact same.

Except now you can choose anything that you want.

But you're going to see that it's required experimentation interactive application.

It's pretty much the exact same thing.

But now you're doing it individually, and you can work on a problem of your choice with any type of deep learning.

So in this class we cover computer vision, NLP recommendation systems, and generative.

We don't cover a lot of time series, but if you're like, I really want to dive into some time series deep learning, you can go for that.

Totally fine to do that for this class, so you can choose whatever you want for that final project.

All right. Okay.

Coming back here. There's a couple of things about, oh, before I do that,

I should show you guys on campus is otherwise you might never look at it if you miss a class, totally fine.

Um, all the videos are here, so we'll have the in-class lecture.

The entire one is here from last semester. I'll post the ones from this semester.

They're also on Panopto so you can find those. Here are individual lectures because I teach this course online in the summer,

so I have it broken down into specific components of the lecture so they don't have to sit there and watch two hours.

They can just sit there and watch like ten minutes at a time.

So if you prefer that format, also if you're like, I'm really confused about this concept, you can go back here and rewatch stuff.

Um, slides are all here. Um, different resources are here, apps that we'll talk about in class.

Yeah, these are the lectures that are posted. They're like, are they going to be a little different?

A lecture that would be on Panopto this year versus last year's lecture since the projects are different or are the lectures the same?

Yeah, it's a great question. Um, so the lectures are pretty similar.

I've made some modifications. What I have given you guys this semester is you guys have access to my Google Slides.

So when I make changes, you guys will see those changes immediately.

Um, in previous years, I have only given access to the PDFs, and that's been a real pain in the butt that you could change those.

Um, so you have the PDFs from last year so you can see what's different between last year and this year.

Um, but you'll also have links to this year's, um, slides.

Which do tend to change a little bit, but not too much because the content stays pretty similar.

Uh, let's see, you got code here. So we got video demos of code, um, for TensorFlow and PyTorch.

We've got the GitHub. And then here is the specific chapters of the textbook I would recommend reading if you're

really interested in diving a little bit deeper into the stuff we're talking about in class.

Let's see, I think. Yeah. And then here is where you get the Google Cloud credits.

So, uh, the instructions for the credits are here in canvas.

So you're going to want to go and check those out. Also, my office hours schedule is here.

So come to office hours if you have any questions, either mine or Stuart's which will which look like they're going to be right after mine.

Um, so Mondays are the days to get help in this class. Questions on canvas.

Okie dokie. Okay, so a couple helpful hints for this class.

So there's a couple places where people always have challenges in this class as we have just a couple slides on it.

One is model evaluation. So really thinking through the right evaluation metrics for your use case and having rationale are really important.

Also having proper validation and test sets right.

So three different sets. So when you have your part of data divided into three pieces um really important.

And then um, Occam's razor keeping it simple.

Uh, you have to do that traditional email approach and then you have to use the naive approach.

And I am probably being a dead horse here. But now you've approached there's always so many questions on it.

An example of this is algorithm to determine heart rate from a camera.

The mean heart rate in my data set would be a naive approach here.

Another example when fine tuning, typically the naive approach is going to be the model before fine tuning.

So you have based ResNet 50. You're going to do it on whatever task you have before you fine tune it.

And then you go through a transfer learning fine tuning process and then you evaluate it afterwards.

So your naive is usually just your model without any fine tuning.

Questions. Okay. Building prototypes, um, is a big portion of this class.

You know, when I started working as a data scientist, it didn't really matter that you could build stuff in.

Mostly matter, that you could put together really nice slides with really nice visualizations.

Um, kind of showing the results of your model, you know, having really nice loss curves,

confusion matrices, pulling out images, uh, that showed failure cases for your models.

That was pretty much it.

But then Darwin to ChatGPT came out and that right at that moment, people were suddenly like, we want to use the tools ourselves.

And so all of our clients wanted us to build things that they could personally interact with,

which is a lot harder than having like really nice curated visualizations.

But that's the reality of the world now, is that we're in build mode.

And so building prototypes really important. This is why it's such, uh, an emphasis in this class.

Some things to think about when you're building your demos. How are people going to access it?

Is it something that you want freely available? Especially in our class, it has to be publicly accessible.

But that doesn't mean it has to be publicly accessible to everyone.

You could have a password protected and just give us the password in your submission.

So if you are working on something that's a little bit more sensitive that you don't want the general public to have, there are options for that.

Stuart and I just have to be able to grade it. How polished does it need to be?

Is this a demo to the CEO of a company you want to work for, or is this a demo to your cat?

And I want you to think in this class, this is a demo to a senior.

This is in a demo to an investor. And then this is really important especially for this class.

Right. You're in a class. You don't want to spend a lot of money putting together a demo.

And so thinking about hosting costs these have come down significantly.

You can host so much for free or for like $5 a month.

It is absolutely crazy. But it's something to be thoughtful about is how much is your demo going to cost?

I mean, talk through a lot of these resources already, but here's just a bunch of links to them.

So when you go back to the slide, you you can see them hugging face is great to host models, to host data sets.

You can even host a demo on Streamlit or radio.

It is free for CPAs and then you can pay a small fee for GPU.

So if you need to run a GPU, that can be a good option.

A replicate is another great option if you are building a model that you are going to need to run a GPU because you only pay for inference,

so you are paying for this GPU to be on all the time. All you are paying for is when somebody pings that model and they run inference on it.

So you're paying a lot less money.

You could also do a lot of fun things like create discord bots, uh, using replicate models or models that you host to replicate.

Uh, web demos. You can. You can host your model, um, elsewhere.

But you could do a Next.js app here. Uh vercel.

In Next.js, it's free for individual. They have a bunch of cool templates that you can go off of.

So thinking about that UX and then of course you can use the traditional AWS, GCP, Azure.

There's a lot of other platforms. Stuart do you have anything to add here is like resources for them when they're building prototypes.

Uh the sell is always on that. Yeah. Um.

Um, yeah. Convex. Convex stuff makes like a lot of, um, of, like back end stuff that would normally require things like.

Awesome. With that, they've got a free. And it's really good with cutting agents.

Um, so I'll be doing more about it.

That's great. Yeah, that's a good one. Super base also. Yeah.

If you need a database. Super bass has a pretty nice free option.

I mean, you're building stuff. I mean, thinking about, like, where both people actually want to use.

And what would you want to use? What would your friends want to use? What are your classmates want to use if they're not excited about it?

And it's going to be hard to get other people to be excited about your project.

So thinking about things that are actually useful or interesting.

All right. Questions? All right, let's take a five minute, uh, restroom break, and then we are going to jump into neural networks.

Exactly. Yeah.

Over 100 years, I think.

I think that I can utilize Mr. Maxwell.

Put it back. You've been modified.

Nothing works. So. It was.

It was already going on. Yeah.

What was. I feel like, you know, I just want you out there.

No worries. I suppose you could have done that today.

And it was really good back in. It's been hard for me to get the front ends here like that.

It's not even that fast. I just made first 506.

It's like I thought I was so good at school. Thanks for that.

And I don't like it. Yeah, I'm probably going to try and use whatever, but really not that hard.

In case you didn't. Yeah, it's. A little bird that you.

Always like. It just feels so good. And there's one more.

Thing that happens. Yeah.

So you're not dropping out? Sure.

Good, good. That's no way. How was your brain? Good, good, good.

Yeah, I'm actually looking forward to it.

Oh my God. I have to tell you, because I actually, I think I've seen you actually like me and like you said.

Yeah. And then I'm like that, like I already told you.

Uh, and you can look at me. I think you are being, well, a little bit.

You can tell I love story. You know, the naive approach.

And it's it's a little bit. Yeah. This is actually what's happening.

It's not like I'm sorry for the same reason as being like, you know, I have this class, and I have no idea.

Are you in an organization or is it just, you know, personal accounts, personal personal assistant, public affairs?

We have a number. As long as my heart is okay.

Oh, yeah. Pretty much too much.

There you go. I actually have a question for you right now.

My sister. What happened to our house?

Oh. Cool.

Yeah. It's like. Right. And and that's where. I started going to, um, you know, they're all going to be like, oh, I can organize my homework.

Oh, yeah, I know, I know, it's okay. I know, I know.

I know, I feel like what is not right.

Yeah, well, I'd like to read all this stuff. Because I was out here.

I did, I did, I did I was like, you know, 45.

No, there's no way. No, I knew I was legally actually, I knew I was yeah, I was.

Sitting out. Oh yeah. For sure. Yeah I was yeah. You know.

When I say okay. Sure I mean I know.

And they actually. You think that that's not what I'm worried about.

That's really you interact with.

So like. Uh, I'm not sure.

Yeah. I'm just explaining that I don't know how you don't have to use, um.

Is it on your. Phone at all?

Did it not check? Oh, yeah. I'm like, oh my God, is there.

Oh my God. Oh my God.

Oh my God. And then have you ever thought about like like.

I don't remember eating out. Oh.

No no. But I was like I'm making up.

I think maybe I presented for an interview today. So, you know, I think it doesn't automatically like, you know.

Other modifications. We also are using the chart experts.

I don't know if I'm wrong.

I think we just have to go out.

I can find a way I. Know, I know, I really.

Wanted to I like this you.

I actually like you almost like okay, um I did I, I can think about that.

I was kind of like, yeah, they already have that, right?

Okay. What is it about? What I like about you.

And I'm like, yeah, I'm. Like, yeah, I'm good.

Okay. So just. So, you know, but I have, you know, that it comes from how, you know, it's even like even an educational person.

I was like, oh, she was and I yeah, I don't know anything about that issue.

And then I went on. So I can put that.

Over like some way of representing I have. No, that's not right.

I'm not sure if I know, but you.

Know. So I sort of it is more like this one.

I just felt like. I felt like I know what I talked about and, you know, maybe coming out.

What are you. I don't know, you should be like, oh, I didn't see that.

It wasn't like, okay, that's it. I. Was gonna say, oh, I do like.

3000 a month I think.

Oh that's crazy. It was so much time with them. I know what they use. It was.

Yeah, yeah, yeah. I have a problem.

When I was your partner.

We are so mad this afternoon. Yes. Oh, no. Oh, no.

You guys can keep. It that way.

I'm just gonna wear a shirt. We'll see how much. Yeah. Oh, yeah.

I'm doing. Something.

That's fine. Thank you. All right, now let's come back to you.

I wish you might be able. To do it.

You get it? Bro, it's not like.

Oh. I don't know, you asked me to tell you about.

This the longest break sequence. Can't go back to ruin.

This is the shortest Breaking bad. I mean, if I had to grab the break for like, six, seven, 6 or 7 where you are, and then I don't.

I don't know how much I want reinforcement learning, deep learning.

You have to wait and see. You don't have to wait long. It's only a few hours away.

No, I can't wait. I'm pretty sure you will be able to win a trophy today in reinforcement learning.

That's the difference. Uh. All right, let's talk about the journey from a neuron to a neural network.

Anybody know what movie this picture is from?

So it will be about hunting. Hunting? Yes. How many people have seen that movie?

Well, actually a good number. Next. Well, if you don't know, you're going to basically hear the whole part of that movie.

When I tell you about a young man in 1943 named Walter Pitts.

So Walter Pitts, um, he was a young man who was, uh, bullied a lot.

Um, he was running away from some bullies one day and, uh, popped into, uh, the library.

To hide from his bullies, and he started reading some books there.

And he came across a book called Principia mathematica.

Anybody read that book? Read the books.

Oh. How is it? Uh, it's it's very comprehensive.

It is a tome of knowledge. It's large. Comprehensive.

Uh, written by Greek mathematician of the day, Bertrand Russell.

And, uh, young Walter Pitts was reading this book and found three errors in Principia mathematica.

And thinking that Doctor Russell needed to know about this.

He penned him a letter and he, uh, wrote out, you know, these are the problems.

These are the three errors that I see in this book.

And Bertrand Russell, uh, being a, uh, a not a cranky academic, he was very surprised and impressed.

He was like, yes, you did find three errors in the book. Uh, we'll correct that in the next version.

And how would you like to come and be my graduate student? He was in the UK at the time.

Would you like to come and be my graduate student? Uh, he didn't know that Walter Pitts was only 12 years old.

A few years later, Bertrand Russell actually came to university in Chicago,

and Walter Pitts, finding that Bertrand Russell was coming over, he ran away from home.

He didn't have a great home life, so 15 at the time ran away from home and ended up at University of Chicago and,

uh, started to become a janitor there. So they gave him some odd jobs, and he would sneak into the back of classrooms and then, um, in office hours,

he would go to office hours of great logicians and mathematicians and tell them about how their theories were completely wrong.

Uh, this young man, uh, ended up in the office of a neuro psychiatrist, uh, named Warren McCullough.

And McCullough had a soft spot for young Walter Pitts and actually, uh, brought him home because Walter Pitts was living outside at the time.

He was completely homeless. So we offered him a home.

You brought him home, and, uh, they started talking together about this idea, and we're mcos and thinking like, how could I model a human neuron?

Because he was all about the human brain and trying to figure out how could you mathematically model this?

And Walter Pitts, being a self-study mathematician, had a lot of ideas on how you might go about doing this.

And so they would stay up until 4 a.m. thinking about how they could possibly mathematically model the human brain, starting with the human neuron.

But that brings us to the neuron that they came up with.

So at the age of 18, Walter Pitts and Warren McCulloch, who was much older, he was in his 50s at the time.

They published a paper introducing a mathematical model of a neuron.

And here's what it is. It's a simple linear model produces a positive or negative output given a set of inputs and weights.

So this is a human neuron. And so Stuart cover your ears because you're a neuroscientist.

Uh, so this is a oversimplification of a human neuron,

but basically you've got dendrites here and they bring in all this information from other cells.

This information is processed. It travels down the axon. And then here it is.

It goes out to other cells. They wanted to model this and figure out how to model this.

And so they have this note here. They have inputs that come into this node or two neuron.

And then they have an output similar to how this neuron is.

And here is what it looks like. So we have our inputs x1, x2 and x3.

We have weights, weights one, two and three that are determining the importance of each of these.

You sum these and then you get some output. Now to some of you.

Here you go Sam. It's your linear regression. Some of you might be saying well.

Isn't this just linear regression? You got x1 y1, you got x1 beta one.

So yes, the model of the neuron that they came up with is actually just linear regression.

Okay. So let's flash forward a little bit to 1958.

Another young man, a graduate student, uh, named Rosenblatt.

He created the first perceptron stories about the creation of machines.

Having human qualities have long been a fascinating province in the realm of science fiction.

And he brought together a bunch of reporters and showed them the very first computer,

the very first computational machine, a perceptron that brought this mathematical idea of a neuron to life.

So let's talk about how this worked. So what the perceptron does is introduces a little something here.

It introduces a threshold. So it's sort of just spitting out an output.

Now we do something with that output. Now we actually make a decision about that output here.

So now my output is going to be one.

If we're greater than that threshold. Whatever number comes out of here is greater than this threshold.

We're going to be one and it's going to be zero otherwise. So now we actually make a decision based on that number.

And this is called an activation function. So the simplest form of an activation function is a threshold.

We're going to talk about other activation functions today that are a bit more complex than a simple threshold.

But when you're confused about the concept of an activation function,

just think of it like a threshold just passing some information through and not other information.

That's our activation function, denoted by phi.

Okay, so we got a little bit of a problem here with our original neuron idea, right?

It's just linear regression, which means I can only model something that is linear.

So what if I instead want to model something that looks like this?

I want to create a model for this curve separating out my orange data from my green data.

Unfortunately, our decision boundary is always in line when we're talking about a single neuron.

So we could draw a line like this 2X1 minus x two plus one equals zero.

But then we getting some orange overlapping with the green.

And similarly here if we try a different line we're still not able to approximate this curve.

So with only one neuron, we can only represent that one. Your decision boundary.

But what if we use two neurons? So now we use the same lines we did before this line and this line.

And now we can actually approximate that non-linear boundary by using two neurons.

This is called the multilayer perceptron. And with a sufficiently large number of units we can approximate any function.

So, for example, if we were going to approximate a circle, which would be the hardest curve to approximate, right.

Um, with eight perceptrons you can see that we can almost approximated.

But by the time we get to 16 perceptrons, so 16 neurons that each represent a line.

So only we can approximate it nearly perfectly.

And that is the whole concept of a neural network where we stick multiple neurons together and we stack them in

order to be able to look at non evaluate non linear decision boundaries and to be able to evaluate over those.

And so here's just a little bit of terminology. So this is very simple three layer neural network.

We've got our input layer here. We've got our hidden layer here.

So any layer that is not seen at the input or the output we're going to call a hidden layer.

So some neural networks are going to have more hidden layers than others. And then we have our output layer here.

You'll see the fees that are all our activation functions here.

You're going to see weights that are going to connect these.

And here you can see weight 112.

We've got neuron one connected to neuron two in the second layer.

So two second layer first neuron first neuron.

Remember zero indexed. Okay.

And then here is what a representation of this would look like.

Um, at this particular, uh, neuron. So if we look at d sub one of two equals weights of 112 times x sub one.

I get the picture here bringing all of those weights in some them to summing the weights multiplied by their inputs,

and then adding a bias term which we haven't talked about in just a couple of minutes.

Questions. I'll make sense.

Okay. All right.

So we're to talk about the history of neural networks. A lot of people think that I happened only a few years ago.

When you talk to the general public, they're like, yeah, that's amazing. New technology.

Actually, 1943 right. We proposed the model of the neuron.

We have early AI research here on 1958. Rosenblatt demonstrates a perceptron.

And then we have what we call an AI winter. So this is a period of time where people were not very interested in AI.

And there was a drop in research funding, because, remember, until pretty recently, there wasn't a lot of industry interest in AI.

It was mostly government and research that were interested in AI.

So I went to, uh, in 1982, Hopfield introduced the bidirectional neural network.

And this kind of revives research efforts in the early 1980s.

Uh, and then in 1986, three independent research groups developed backpropagation, uh, for training neural networks.

And so, uh, we really have this nice period here in the 80s.

And then in the late 90s, early 2000, we have another AI winter where people are not investing a lot of interest or money into AI research.

This is revived in 2009 when Feifei Li, who's now at Stanford, uh, held the image net competition.

And so especially it's the history of neural networks is really interesting because there

was this explosion right around here where we're like convolutional neural networks.

They're so cool.

Uh, we can do so many things with them, and then we don't really have much data, and we couldn't really actually do that much with CNN.

But then, Feifei, we thought, well, we just need more images that are labeled.

And so she collected a huge amount of data and then used Mechanical Turk, um, on Amazon.

So Amazon has this platform where they will pay people like $0.01 to label each image.

And so she used that platform and created this very large data set of images scraped from the internet,

and then their labels that were labeled by human. She releases this in 2009 as a competition.

So she actually released it earlier, not as a competition, and nobody cared.

And then she was like, well, we're going to so I'm going to have a competition.

And then people started caring in 2012, AlexNet, which we are going to talk about in this class that won the ImageNet competition.

And then in 2015, the ResNet architecture won the competition.

And that competition exploded the use of convolutional neural networks and starting to build bigger and bigger neural networks.

In 2017, Attention is All You Need was published.

What architecture did that introduce? The transformer?

Yes, exactly. So transformer architecture introduced in 2017.

And you know what? Nobody gave [INAUDIBLE] up.

Nobody cared in 2017. Um, except for this one really tiny research group company.

They were kind of weird. Um, OpenAI are the only ones who really cared that this stuff came out.

And then a few years later, 2022 chapter 15.

And then here is really where we get into that generative AI boom, where now we have advancements happening all the time,

and all of us are racing to keep up with the next architecture or new pre-processing pipeline or new data set.

And it is challenging to keep up with it because for so long it was, you know,

every few years, every ten years or so, we're getting a new advancements.

And now it feels like it's every week. Now, one thing to note in this history, this history is created by young people.

Walter Pitts right. 18 Rosenblatt, graduate student.

All of this work and backpropagation, all done by graduate students, including Yann LeCun.

He was young, in his 20s at the time. All of the research that we see here was developed by people that were pretty young.

And so what I want you to come away with from this is to say, where am I going to be in this history?

And I can be part of this history right now.

I don't have to wait until I'm older to be a part of this, like you are a part of that history, and this timeline is going to keep extending.

And where are you on this time? All of you are going to be somewhere on this timeline.

So why now? So why now? Are people really excited about this stuff?

Why in the last, you know, 15 years or so, have we suddenly seen deep learning come to its own?

Well, the first is training data and labels. So the amount of data available has just grown exponentially.

Right? We've got a lower cost of storage, much lower than any other time in history.

And we have a bunch more access to data, all kinds of sensors and connected devices.

Cameras are sensors, right? There's cameras everywhere.

There's camera recording our classroom right now and recording every classroom going on right now at do.

And that's just the camera, right? There's all these other sensors. You've got microphones in here.

These are sensors, right. Collecting all of this data. There's temperature sensors in here.

Humidity sensors. We all have dozens of sensors on this thing.

All kinds of sensors, right? Uh, all of this is this data is being collected and it's being stored.

And so we have a lot of training data, and then we have platforms like Mechanical Turk now where people are labeling this data.

And now we have a lot of labeled data. A lot of efforts have been made to label these vast amounts of data.

So ImageNet, 1.2 million images or 2 million images, like people went in and labeled 1.2 million images.

And more people are labeling images now for millions, right?

It's crazy computational power. Right. That is increased tremendously, allowing for much deeper neural networks.

GPUs obviously have been a big part of that. Algorithmic advancements have been made overcome a lot of the limitations of neural networks.

And we're going to talk a lot about these in this class. So why do we actually want to use neural networks?

Right. You had a whole class 520 on traditional machine learning.

Why wouldn't you just use those? Well, you're going to use neural networks if you have lots of training data.

So you're not going to use this if you only have a tiny bit of training data. Right. These models are really going to overfit on that.

You need a lot of training data. If you have lots of training data, that's going to be really slow to do that with a decision tree.

And you guys are going to get the opportunity to do this because you have to build a traditional model for each one of your projects.

So you're going to have to sit there for six hours for one of these things.

Trains. So you're going to experience why we use deep learning.

If you have a very large number of features, especially features that are come from really unstructured data,

this is a great opportunity to use your own networks.

If you have really complex relationships between features and the target,

once they are really hard for you to put into words, you don't immediately know how to extract features.

Engineer features to be able to create a traditional machine learning model that might be a place that you can explore neural networks.

And if you have lower concern for explainability.

So if you're not as worried about how interpretable explainable your neural network can or your model is, then you might use a neural network.

A lot of things are a lot easier to do with neural networks.

Things like object detection. Machine translation.

Recommendation systems. We're going to talk about traditional approaches to these.

But a lot of the time neural networks are going to be better.

But they come with their limitations. They're really computationally expensive.

You got your guys's pocketbooks are going to feel that this semester when you were running up, uh, those, uh, the usage on those GPUs.

Uh, which reminds me, should not has a GPU, apparently that he's willing to let you guys use.

So message him. Uh, he posted about it on the API discord and then emailed me about it.

So if you guys want to use a GPU, reach out to him.

Okay. Habitation. Expensive. So for a small 28 by 28 image.

So this is 28 pixels by 28 pixels right. This is tiny.

And a three layer network like the one we just saw. We actually have 28 times, 28 times, 100 times ten, 784,000 weights to try to learn.

So very small, um, networks, very computationally expensive.

They can be very power hungry. So computational resources of our best in class neural networks have doubled every 3 to 4 months since 2012.

Crazy neural networks can be pretty difficult to train.

So you're going to experience some of that frustration while you're training them in this class.

Uh, we use usually nonlinear activation functions.

So remember I talked about the threshold. We're going to talk about activation functions today that are nonlinear.

This means that our IR optimization is non-convex and can make these a little bit trickier to then train.

I mean, it's difficult to interpret the outputs of these, and they're easy to overfit, especially on small data.

Of the biggest questions that you're going to get might have mentioned this in 510 is how much data do we need?

And that's going to continue with neural networks right. Somebody is going to come to you.

They're going to say I need you to do this. How much data do I need? There's not really good answers, right?

It's very domain dependent. Architecture dependent? Dependent on what type of valuation criteria you have, how robust you want it to be.

How generalizable you want it to be. There's a lot of factors at play to say how much is enough data.

So when we say deep learning, deep just refers to the number of layers in which the data is transformed.

So we do have, you know, very simple neural networks. You might have built one in Jon's class last semester.

Um, and these are not necessarily considered deep learning, although they are considered neural networks.

Uh, with deep learning we have more layers and more layers allow our network to just learn more complex features at various levels of abstraction,

such that the neural networks of today have trillions of parameters, which is just mind boggling.

Now the really cool thing here. So how many of you in John's class did feature engineering for some of your traditional machine learning models?

Hopefully it's everyone. Okay, great. How many of you enjoyed that process?

Okay, a couple of you. How many of you did not enjoy that process?

Okay, so deep learning is going to be good for you guys, right?

Um, it automatically discovers and learns the features from the data so you don't have to.

And the ability to learn this makes it really powerful for tasks like image recognition where it's really hard to feature engineer an image.

You guys are going to get to do that. Um, natural language processing, right?

Really hard to say. Like, what are the specific concepts in text that I want to engineer features of?

And then of course, any type of complex decision making,

it's really hard whenever it's hard for us to describe, then it's harder for us to engineer features.

And so that's usually a place where deep learning might come in handy.

Okay. Let's come back to these guys activation functions.

So we talked about this. The perceptron. Introduce our threshold here.

And let's talk a little bit more about this activation function. You can think of an activation function as a decision maker.

These are the decision making points in your neural network.

It's going to answer the question how much of this signal should be passed forward in my neural network?

So here is where these, uh, the, the activation functions are.

Um, and so it's deciding how much of all of these inputs and their weights come into the, of two and two.

And how much of that information should be password in my neural network.

Does it matter for that output. Maybe it does and maybe it doesn't.

Maybe it matters a little bit. Maybe it doesn't matter much at all.

And so these activation functions are going to allow us to make those decisions and pass it through the neural network.

Why do we have these. Well several reasons. One, it adds non-linearity.

And adding non-linearity allows us to, um, compute more complex decision boundaries and allows us to compute more complex problems.

Uh, and also controls are output range. So it makes the model easier to understand and helps us learn those more complex patterns in the data.

And what it is other than just a simple threshold. It's a function that maps our input.

Remember that input is a weighted sum into that neuron and it maps it into an output, typically within some predefined range.

So for example, one activation function is our sigmoid which maps the z that output between 0 and 1.

So we put whatever output we get here. And for z it's going to map that between 0 and 1.

Here's a table of a bunch of different activation functions. We've got sigmoid up top.

The one I just showed or just showed you guys. Um, this is a smooth, gradual transition from 0 to 1.

Uh, really popular for our binary classification tasks.

Um, it does suffer from the vanishing gradient problem, which we are going to talk about later today.

Um, and so it's often used in output layers for binary tasks,

but it's not used inside of the neural network because of that vanishing gradient problem.

We also have the hyperbolic tangent for other bounded tasks, because its range is going to map things between -1 and 1.

Um, and so in some cases it's more efficient than the sigmoid.

And so you might use it then, but it does still suffer from that vanishing gradient problem.

So again we're only going to use this at those output layers for bounded tasks.

Now ReLU is everyone's favorite. Um it's everyone's favorite because it's just super efficient and easy to use.

It's going to output zero for any type of negative input. And then it's going to have a linear relationship for positive inputs.

Very computationally efficient. Um, this is the default choice for hidden layers because of its simplicity.

Now there's a lot of variations of ReLU, including leaky ReLU, because sometimes for our ReLU, it can cause neurons to die.

Uh, which means they stop activating for any input due to our zero slope for negative values.

Um, this is called the dying railway problem. So we introduced leaky ReLU, which is just negative infinity to infinity.

And so it allows a very small positive slope for negative values addressing that dying Reagan problem.

If dead neurons become an issue you can try that. Usually it's not too much of a problem.

And then the last activation function that we're going to talk about today is our softmax function.

This is going to map our outputs between 0 and 1 for each class.

And then the sum across all of those classes is going to be equal to one.

So this is often used in our final layer of our neural network when we have multi-class

classification because it assigns those decimal probabilities to each class.

So it's the output of our multi-class classification task.

And so when you're thinking of, okay, what are the things that I really want to remember from this class?

Print out this table because this table is a really helpful and handy, um,

gives you a helpful and handy understanding of some of these activation functions which are ripe for interview questions.

And then here are the equations for our sigmoid hyperbolic tangent.

Really picky Rayleigh and softmax. And here you can see a visualization of them.

So between 0 and 1 for our sigmoid three negative one and one for a hyperbolic tangent.

And then you can see really well where we here zero for negative outputs below zero.

And now we have this positive linear slope. Harder to see leaky ReLU which is a tiny positive slope here.

If you're negative and then you have a linear.

Uh it looks the same as ReLU for positive inputs. Okay, so I have this fun little app.

You can go to canvas or you can use the QR code here.

All right. So this is fun because you can try different input values and you can try different activation functions.

So we have our sigmoid that's shown there now. And now you can see what that same input would look like.

So let's say we have an input of negative three.

What that input looks like whether we have a hyperbolic tangent or a sigmoid for that input is mapped to we're going to remove.

And ReLU of course gets mapped to zero. And then leaky ReLU gets mapped to -0.0300.

And so this little app is just fun for getting a little bit of intuition on the differences between these different activation functions,

because you can adjust the input value, and then you can see how your output is mapped based on which activation function you choose.

All right. Let's talk about another component of our neural network that you may have been wondering about.

So this is our neural network.

And you might have noticed that we had some neurons up here and we had some values that said, be anybody wonder about these.

You guys were like, no, I just trust Doctor Bench. There are just ones in a neural network.

I'm just going to believe that there's a ones there. Okay.

So let's talk about, uh, this value here that gets stuck in our neural network.

And this is bias, the good kind of bias.

So we usually don't want bias in our models. However in neural networks we do add in some bias here.

And the rationale for adding this bias is because when you update your weight,

your weights can change the shape of your function, of your, um, of your activation function here.

And so that can change with the weights. However, weights cannot shift.

You plot back and forth. And so we add a bias term, which is another learnable parameter that we learn when we train the neural network.

And now we can actually shift our activation function back and forth.

And so it allows us to be able to do that. And so I've got another one here for you.

Um, so you can look at changing weight versus changing bias.

And so here you can play around with, uh,

what if we are changing the weights and you can see what happens to our activation function and outputs here.

Well, our outputs from the activation function here. So increasing the rate weight is making it tighter.

Reducing the weight is making it more linear.

All right. Now let's look at the bias term. So now the bias term allows us to shift.

It was just allows us to have more flexibility when we're modeling things.

Questions about bias. All right.

So now that we kind of have a general understanding of some of the terminology of neurons.

Now we're going to talk about training a neural network. So we're going to do the most important training task.

And I just determined the difference between blueberry muffins and chihuahuas.

All right, so what do we do here? Well, what we do is we collect a bunch of data.

Blueberry muffins. And we get some poor food to sit there and label blueberry muffin.

And then we do the same thing with dogs. And so I source this data from Reddit, but you would get a lot more data from various locations.

A blueberry muffins and three dogs.

And if you were training a very large model, would you probably have to do is just rely on captions that somebody else put,

uh, that say either Chihuahua or blueberry muffin.

And so somebody posts on Instagram a picture of a blueberry muffin.

They capture it, you know, blueberry muffin. Yum. And then you use that caption as a label.

And so that's what will happen usually at scale.

So what we're going to do is we're going to put one image or a batch of images through our model at one time.

So we're going to put this image through our model. And we're going to forward propagate it.

Now to start out. All of these weights are randomly initialized because we don't know what they are right.

We don't know what our weights and biases should be. So we just say they're just random values.

We're to set them to be completely random values here. So all these lines represented by weights and biases are just set to random numbers.

Makes sense. Okay. So then we start our training process.

We put in our image through and we propagate it through our network.

Now our network is random. It doesn't know what this is an image of a blueberry muffin.

And so its prediction is going to be completely random. My guess McGarry muffins or might give us dog.

And so here it gives us dog even though our label is blueberry muffin.

And so now what we do is we update our weights and biases with the knowledge of this

mis prediction to try to get it closer to labeling this image as a blueberry muffin,

to try to push those weights and biases closer so that when this image is pushed through again, the prediction becomes blueberry muffin.

So let's talk about how this works.

So first we initialize the ways to be small random values for each observation or batch or mini batch in our training set.

We are going to start at that input layer forward. Propagate that training data through our network layers.

We're going to generate an output. We're going to calculate the error of our output using our selected cost function which we're going to talk about.

And then we calculate the gradient or derivative of the error with respect to every weight in our network.

Now we're going to use gradient descent to update each weight in the direction that minimize error.

And we're going to repeat this until convergence. Make perfect sense.

You guys want a wig? Stand up.

Stretch. Yes, it makes perfect sense.

All right, let's let's do a stretch break. See some stretching, guys?

It's only Tuesday, I guess. I mean, come on. I mean, you did a class yesterday or just your first class?

No, in the first class. First class. Okay, so.

So for some of you, it's your first class. So, you know, we're gonna get back into the swing of things first class.

Sure needs your coffee. How's it work?

Yeah. Dominic. Uh, maybe a I help. It makes sense.

Um, for. I remember at the end of last, um, semester, we discussed a little bit of, like, assessments in this class and mostly conceptual here.

Um, in this case, I mean, would we kind of be required to describe at least three steps here, especially the underlined sections?

That's kind of how we would think about structuring our learning for an exam.

Yes, exactly. All of my questions come directly from the slides, the in-class content.

Yes. The in-class assessments that we're going to do. First one will be an exam.

All going to come from the slides. You guys can sit down. Was and so you will usually know from my slides what things are important.

So not underline them or told them I put like emojis around them.

Then uh we're going to talk a lot more in depth about all of this.

Um, because I would be surprised if you've got all of what neural network training is from this slide.

This is our overview. Now let's talk about each of these. All right. We're going to do a different problem now okay.

Now we're going to say how many blueberries are in this image.

And we're going to of course remember randomly initialize going to pass it through it doesn't know.

So it's going to say to my label is four. So I went through and label four here.

Debate with me about whether it's four or not. Uh but regardless the error here is two.

So the feedback now that we have for training is that we want to minimize this error.

Does that make sense. Minimize the error between our prediction and label.

Okay. This is our loss function. This is what we call a loss function.

Loss functions can be anything. You can create your own loss function.

Can be whatever you, uh, whatever you want it to be. Uh, a couple of the common ones are mean, absolute error in this case.

So for minus two we take the absolute value of that is two. We can also do mean squared error right.

We don't want really large errors. Um so we're going to square that four minus two squared equals four.

Either of these work just fine in this particular situation.

And so we use this method as feedback for training. How do we do that?

We'll get there before we get there. Just a terminology thing.

You're going to hear the terms loss function and cost function thrown around.

They're usually used interchangeably. This is the appropriate definitions of each loss function is the error of one training example.

One cost function is the average error across the entire training set.

Will I [INAUDIBLE] this up when I do it?

Yes, I will, and I am not going to expect you guys to know perfectly the difference between a loss and cost function.

However, this is just that slide that tells you what the appropriate um, definitions of each of these are.

Okay. Uh, just a couple of loss functions and when to use them.

We got mean squared error and mean absolute error, which we've already seen.

We're going to use these in regression cases where the output is that number.

And we're going to use mean squared error when we want to penalize significantly the presence of outliers.

Um so for example here house price predictions, uh, based on some normal distribution, uh,

we want to predict house price predictions and we want to penalize the presence of outliers here.

Mean absolute error. You use when you don't want to penalize outliers considerably or at all.

So for example, predicting delivery times for a food delivery company, right?

You might not care as much about the outliers here. And so mean absolute error may be more appropriate.

We also have Huber loss here. Um, and uh, the quadratic component of our Huber loss characterizes the advantages of MSE that penalize outliers,

um, and has linear components that mimic, uh, the mean absolute error.

So it has less sensitivity to the error size and ensures the train model isn't over penalizing those large errors.

Typically, what you're going to see is one of these two is going to be used for regression.

But occasionally you'll see Huber loss being used as well.

Now for tasks like classification, a couple of them that are very common are binary cross entropy,

which you're going to use for what type of classification? Binary cross entropy multiply.

Hi everyone. Let's try to get binary cross entropy multiclass thanks in binary classification okay.

And then we have categorical cross entropy here that we're going to use for multi-class classification.

A practical note is that loss functions can be anything.

And custom loss functions can really help improve your model outcomes and align better with the problem that you are trying to solve.

Um, when I was working at Nike and a specific time series based problem, we actually came up with our own custom loss function.

Um, and our models, uh, tended to work a lot better.

The ones that were trained up using our custom loss functions,

because we can customize the loss function for exactly what we cared about for that particular application.

And this is pretty easy to do in PyTorch. It's only a few lines of code to create your own custom loss function.

So a really fun thing to play around with. Although oftentimes you'll find that it'll work about the same as one of the commonly used loss functions.

They're commonly used for a reason. All right.

So when you're choosing your loss function right, you have to make a choice of why you are using this loss function.

Here's what you want to think about. What type of learning problem classification or regression.

You're not going to use binary cross entropy for a regression problem.

And then you want to think binary versus multi-class classification, because that's going to tell you what type of cross entropy you're going to use.

Are you going to think about model sensitivity to outliers. So some loss functions are more sensitive to outliers like mean squared error.

And you might use that if that is something you're um keen on computational efficiency.

So some of our loss functions are more computationally expensive.

Huber loss much more computationally expensive. Works slightly better.

So might be worth the trade off, but it's something to be considered.

Um, uh, when you are choosing what loss function, the convergence properties.

So the smoothness and convexity of a loss function can affect the ease and speed of training.

And this goes along with that computational efficiency.

Right. And then scale. So for very large scale task the loss function has to be scalable right.

You have to have something that scales. Well um, if you're going to be doing a lot of training.

I like to think about a loss function is defining the model's goals.

These are the goals that you're giving to the model.

And so the loss function is incredibly important because it's that opportunity that you have to give the model a goal.

And when we get to think about half the class or more is in reinforcement learning, we're going gonna talk a lot about this.

Um, and reinforcement learning. So the other thing about the loss function is it tells us how wrong your model is.

So when we said how many blueberries we had a prediction of two, there is two.

So our weights and biases that we randomly initialized are actually pretty close.

We got pretty close.

However, if our prediction is 400 and our error is 396 are, which are a lot farther apart, and those are going to need to be changed more.

So the loss function also is going to tell us how wrong our model is.

Okay, so what do we do? Once we know how wrong the model is, right?

Randomly initialized. It should be pretty bad.

Now we know how bad it is. So what do we do to change it?

So we need to figure out how much we need to change the parameters.

Think weights and biases. Right. How much I need to change those in order to improve my prediction.

And so we use something called backpropagation, which goes backward through our network to calculate how much each parameter impacts the.

So how much each weight and each bias is impacting that loss and tells us whether we should

increase or decrease that parameter to make the model's prediction closer to our correct weight.

Then we make those changes using something called gradient descent.

Using that info for backpropagation, and it updates each parameter slightly in the direction that's going to reduce the loss.

Helping make the model make better predictions over time.

All right. Some people have seen this example before. So this is the example for view using race.

Anybody watch The Amazing Race. Wow.

That's it. Wow crazy amazing race.

It's such a good show. Okay.

Well the premise is, um, is that these groups of people are put together and they have to race all over the world doing all kinds of different tasks.

And it used to be that they had to, like, catch an airplane and, and they'd miss their plane and be stuck somewhere in the middle of the world.

That doesn't happen as much anymore, but it's really fun. Okay. So they basically they have a game.

And so let's say that this is The Amazing Race and we have our flag here. So this is the low point here.

And we want to find where this low point is. And so we are going to randomly put somebody on this mountain.

So you are an amazing race Mike. And I'm putting you here on the mountain.

You're randomly initialized. And your goal before time is up is to get here and win The Amazing Race.

Okay. The loss is you want to minimize the distance from this goal, right?

That's what's driving me forward. That's my goal is I want to get as close to here as possible by the time time runs out.

So minimize distance from this goal. That's my loss.

Now backpropagation is going to say which direction do I need to move to reduce the loss.

Because remember Mike is just randomly put on this mountain and he doesn't know where he is relative to the flag.

You got it in place over here or over here or over here.

And should he go up the mountain or should you go down the mountain?

So backpropagation is going to tell us which direction we're going to move to reduce our loss.

Now, gradient descent is where we actually take a step in that direction.

So Mike, you take very big steps. You're going to like basically take a running leave off this mountain.

It's a gradient descent. We're going to take a step in that direction. Now how large this step is.

So how big of a step the Mike's going to take is going to tell us. That's called the learning rate.

That's going to tell us how big of that stuff that we're going to take. We've got our learning rate here.

Now learning rate is really important as you can imagine.

Because if you're learning rate is really small, it's going to take really, really long time to get here.

And Mike's not going to win The Amazing Race.

And if it's too large then you're going to end up all the way over here and you're going to totally miss your goal.

So we need learning rate to be small enough that you don't go past your goal, but large enough that you meet your goal in time.

Okay. So let's go over that a little bit more mathematically.

So gradient descent first order iterative algorithm uh tries to find a local minimum of a differentiable multivariate function.

And the main idea here is to take repeated steps in the opposite direction of the gradient or approximate gradient of our function at a current point,

because this is the direction of steepest descent. So we take the gradient the derivative, and then we go basically down the slope.

We go in the direction of the steepest descent. This is what it looks like mathematically.

Rates of J at our next time step or our next iteration T plus one is going to be equal to our current weight AJ at current time step or iteration T.

We have a minus sign here. Remember we're going opposite of the direction of the gradient because we want to minimize loss.

Sometimes you want to maximize loss on rare occasion.

And then this would be a plus. But for most of the things in this class you're trying to minimize loss.

If you're in xij you remember cases where we had to we wanted to maximize the loss here.

In this class we're minimizing the loss. So we're minimizing the loss with a minus sign here.

This is our learning rate. This tells us how big of a step we're going to take.

That's ETA. And then here we have the partial derivative of the loss function j with respect to waiting.

Okay, so I have a fun app. I say fun app.

You guys are like, it's not that fun. Okay. Okay, so this one's really fun.

Um, because you can do gradient descent.

You can do, uh, change up your learning rate. And so here let's go ahead and start it.

Our learning rate is 0.3 a pretty good level. Um, you can see it takes us eight steps to converge or get close enough to zero that we call it good.

Close enough to that minimum. Uh, let's make the learning rate really tiny.

Yeah. Reset it. So now it takes longer.

Still going. So going steps. It's taking.

So going, so going.

I'm not patient enough to wait. But we're at 30 steps and still counting.

Oh 32. All right. So we converge after 32 steps.

It's just inefficient right.

Because if you're doing this for all of your your training sample observations or batches or mini batches, this is going to take a really long time.

And then if we make the learning rate really large let's try that. Now it's going to happen.

Oh, we're just going to bounce back and forth.

And we're never going to reach convergence because we're just pinging back and forth, and we're never actually going to reach the minimum here.

It is 0.5. You get it in one shot. Three.

And that's that's where we got to get it to. Right? That 0.5.

All right. Learning rate. All right. You talked about this.

Small learning rate takes a long time. Marginal learning rate. But we might never converge.

We want to find the optimal learning rate. And this is going to become more important later in this class in this particular class.

All right. So learning rate there's no one size fits all. It's going to vary based on data set architecture problem domain.

It's often in the range of 0.0012 .01.

It's a pretty big range. Order of magnitude. But it's often in that range.

This is the most significant hyperparameter for you to to. All right.

So let's talk about actually how we do it. So we're going to start by training just a neuron.

We're stochastic gradient descent. So remember we've got our inputs and our reads.

We're going to sum them here. Put them through an activation function here.

And then our output here is y hat. So we get an image of a blueberry muffin.

We're going to forward propagate it. And we're going to get y hat our output here.

Now we're going to calculate the gradient of the cost function with respect to each of our weights.

So we're going to go through each of these weights. And we are going to calculate the gradient of the cost function there.

Remember the partial derivative of our cost function with respect to weight subject.

So for each of those. Or to do this using.

And then we're gonna update it using a gradient descent calculation where we have our new weight that we want to change.

We want it to be updated to. We have our old weight.

And then we're going to subtract out that learning rate times, uh, the partial derivative of our cost function with respect to aging.

So we're going to update each weight using gradient descent. And we're going to repeat this.

So that's training a single neuron. Backpropagation comes in because we usually pretty much never train only a single neuron.

And so we actually need to be able to compute, uh, the.

This function, but with respect to weights in a multilayer network.

So how do we actually do this. And so let's say that we have a weight one 1 or 2 over here.

And we want to compute the impact of this weight.

And we want to update this particular weight in our neural network. And remember we're doing this for all of our parameters.

But let's do it for just this one. So we're going to calculate the partial derivative of our cost function with respect to weight 112.

Remember y hat is our output here. And y hat is the activation function here in layer three.

Uh, with the um, output of our uh, previous layer.

So output of layer three here, which is Z three. And again we have that cost function j w.

Remember our cost function something like mean squared error you know absolute error etc.

Okay. So how we're actually going to compute this because we have to go through multiple layers of our network is we're going to use the chain rule.

Anybody remember the chain rule? Okay, nice.

We got at least one person who remembers chain rule. Okay. Chain rule isn't too bad.

It's just taking partial derivatives in a chain. It's easy to remember because it's called the chain rule.

Okay, so I'm trying to find partial derivative of g, uh, or cost function g uh, with respect to d to our, uh, weight 112.

Okay. So let's take a look. So we're going to take the partial derivative of our cost function J with respect to our activation

function feed three multiplied by v three the partial derivative of c three with respect to z3.

By the partial derivative of Z3 with respect to activation function one two.

Right here. By the partial derivative of v1 two.

With respect to z one, two by the partial derivative of z1 two with respect to weight 112.

That's the chain rule. Now to make things a little bit simpler for ourselves.

What we do here is we say, okay, well, we are going to take all of this.

So all of that first bit here. So we're going all the way back through our network.

And we're just going to call this Delta IJ.

So this is the what we're going to call this the error term. Um the node I of May or J.

So we're going to say that's just the error up until here. Okay.

And then we're going to. Define that.

And then now our equation is simplified to.

Now our partial derivative of the cost function with respect to the weight is now equal

to delta one two of this error node by the partial derivative of z1 two over 112.

But wait a second. This piece here. This is just x one, right?

Because this is just a linear sum. And so if we look at the partial derivative of this with this with respect to this it's just x one.

So then that just becomes x one. You can simplify it further. And now we have that error term.

One two multiplied by x one. And that is the derivative of our cost function with respect to weight 112.

We can generalize this a little bit. Um, and basically what this does is just allows us to be able to compute any of these weights.

And so now we have weight, um, I j l and so that you can see here in our equation we have that same node.

So all the way up until that weight. Um, and then a of I l minus one is just going to be this node here.

So now we can then update way sub ijl as we did before using gradient descent.

And so now this node or this part gets replaced with that previous partial derivative of the cost function with respect to that weight.

With this part. And we still have our learning rate theta and then the previous weight.

And this should say. Oh. Plus one. All right.

Questions of backpropagation. Does it make sense how we get there?

Chain rule starting to buzz around in the back of your head. Now you're like, oh yeah, did remember that from somewhere way back when?

Okay, so there's a few different ways that we can go about doing gradient descent.

We can do static gradient descent where we loop through observations one at a time.

Iteratively we calculate the gradients. We update the weights. Um this is really good for online learning right.

Where you have a um inference that you have some data point that's coming in and you want to continually be updating your model,

uh, has more stable convergence due to reduce weight.

Um, this does not use vectorized linear algebra operations, so is pretty slow, which is why it might work for online training.

But if you have a massive data set, you're trying to do these computations.

SGD might not be the right approach. Typically what we'll do is either batch or mini batch,

where we calculate the gradient and weights update based on all the observations from the training set,

some together for each iteration, or we divide the training data into subsets of N observations and perform batch gradient descent.

And each subset is a time that's mini batch. Oftentimes in the defaults when you're in PyTorch or TensorFlow are going to be mini batch.

And then you set a particular end of 8 or 30 to.

Uh, nicely here. It's gonna use vectorized operation.

So this convergence is going to be more stable. It's going to be a lot faster.

Um, and that but it's not quite as ideal for online learning because you are doing it as a batch.

And so if you're doing online learning and you need to wait until you get enough

data to fill a batch and then do it rather than one observation at a time.

And then something else that we do in order to speed up learning is we add a term called momentum.

And so what can happen is, um, when you are computing over the cost function, you can kind of get stuck in a local minima.

Uh, right. Uh, and so you can kind of bounce around a lot, um, especially if you especially if you don't quite choose the right learning rate.

Um, and so what we do here then, is we can add a term called momentum.

And this, uh, just adds a factor of our previous weight change.

And it just kind of reduces the influence of our current iteration and just smooths the training process a little bit.

Uh, and so, uh, we just add this little term here that allows us to be able to control a little bit more, um, that, um, uh, that to descent.

And so you can see here this is just the change in the previous weight.

Um, by um a parameter that we get to set.

All right. Questions so far. How are you feeling?

Okay. All right. Let's talk about some optimization algorithms.

So stable or stochastic gradient descent has a few issues.

Uh, one is that your learning rate has to be set in advance.

So you might not know what works best, right? You have to say, okay, my learning rate is 0.001.

I'm going to train this model and see what happens. So you have to set it up front.

Um, and then you go back and you're like, oh, this didn't really work.

Now I need to change my learning rate. And so you have to go through that process.

You might not know which works best.

We also assume, then, that the same learning rate is going to apply to all of our rate updates across each epoch, which may not be the case.

And if our data is very sparse, we may want to update frequently occurring features less and rarely occurring features more.

So we've got some issues with our stochastic gradient descent.

And so an alternative here is we could adapt our learning rate to the weights themselves.

And so that's exactly what we do. And so we use something called an adaptive optimizer of our learning rate.

So instead of us setting the learning rate for which remember I said it's the most important hyperparameter you have to tune.

Now we let the model itself update the learning rate.

So ETA Grad adapts the learning rate to each weight at each time step.

So it uses lower learning rate, smaller updates for weight to frequently occurring features in the data set,

and then a higher learning rate for larger updates for weights that have more rare features.

So thank you. Know, you have a data set with a bunch of horses and there's some feature on a horse, um, that is not super rare.

And so you're going to use our, um, us smaller updates, but then you have higher learning rate.

Um, like, you know, you have a couple of unicorns in your data set, and then you have a feature that is the horn of the unicorn.

And so you might set a higher learning rate for those features. This is very well-suited for sparse data sets like text.

It eliminates the need to manually tune our learning rate. Um, and then there is a weakness here with the cumulative gradient.

And the denominator eventually makes a step size too small to change the weights.

So eventually it does have problems. Um, so here you can see what we do here.

So remember this is uh the gradient of course with respect to weight J.

We're just going to simplify it a little bit here. Uh this is what we add.

So in the denominator of our learning rate, you know we're going to add um,

a diagonal matrix containing a sum of squares of pass gradients up to time step T.

So that's in the grad. We also have our rmsprop.

This is an alternative proposed by Geoffrey Hinton in his Coursera course of all places.

So we didn't publish a paper. He just built the Coursera course and then proposed this type of adaptive optimizer.

And then it was used widely, which is pretty hilarious. So this attempts to resolve that radically diminishing learning rate in Adagrad by

now having an exponentially decaying average of the squared gradient up to time t.

And so this is it pulled out. And so now you can see here and just add that exponential decaying average in step.

Now those aren't used quite as much anymore because it brings me to the atom optimizer.

So if you've built neural networks before and your.

And when I talked about learning rate, you're like, I never really thought about the learning rate before.

It's probably because all of the defaults use the atom optimizer.

So you've never had to really think about learning rate before. And for a lot of this class,

you're probably not going to think too much about the learning rate because you're going to be using an adaptive optimizer like Adam,

or one of the variations of Adam. Adam is adaptive moment estimation.

That's a combination of those ideas in Rmsprop and from momentum that we talked about.

So uses and moving average of squared gradient from Rmsprop and a moving average of the gradient from momentum.

So we have the exponentially decaying average of the past gradients up to time t and

then exponentially decaying average of the past squared gradients up to time t.

And we use both of these. Then in order to modify that learning rate over time as we are training our model.

Adam is currently regarded as the best optimizer.

So you can see this is iterations over our entire data set and then our training cost here.

And we can see that, um, our Adam optimizer, uh, far exceeds our other adaptive optimizers.

Other optimizers may work better for certain situations. For example, if you have very sparse data, you might want to use Ada grad.

And then of course, there's been a ton of recent improvements, especially in the last year or two years around the Adam optimizer.

There's all kinds of different variations of it. For most applications, Adam still works fine, but if you have a little bit of trouble, um,

and your loss curves look a little bit strange, like you might have some challenges with your learning rate.

An adaptive optimizer, um, would you might choose. You might try one of these, um, other Adam options.

You can see the popularity of it. And so here.

That's just 2012 to 2017 here. And you can see what happened when it was released.

It's just filled with an exponential usage of atom versus the other.

Um. Types of adaptive optimizers.

And then we won't go through this. But this is really, really fun.

If you want to go and play with this. Uh, you actually have to download it onto your computer.

But it's this visualization tool that allows you to play around with, uh,

gradient descent with different learning rates and add momentum and add different adaptive optimizers,

and then look at different, um, loss curves and see, like how quickly, um, it, um, converges or gets to the minimum point of a massacre.

Yeah. Kind of fun way to visualize it. Questions.

Oh. Do certain model textures work better with different optimizers?

It's more about the data set that works better or worse with different optimizers.

Okay. Yeah. Something like is my data set really sparse?

Is my data set less sparse? And so when you're looking at your data set that's more of the question of what type of adaptive optimizer to use.

Thank you. Yeah. Question. Russians.

All right. Training challenges. Let's talk about some challenges that we have with training neural networks and how we're going to overcome them.

We've got vanishing and exploding gradients. We have getting stuck at local minima.

We have overfitting to our training data. And then we just have really long training cycles where you start training a model,

and then you go to sleep and you wake up and your model still training,

and then you go about your day, your model still training, and you go to sleep again, your model still training.

We don't want to get into those really long training cycles. So how do we avoid some of that okay.

So first up is vanishing gradient. So you probably heard a lot about vanishing gradients.

If you've ever taken a neural networks course before I was found vanishing greedy is really confusing.

Um and so I'm attempting to explain that better than how it was explained to me.

Okay. So when you use activation functions like sigmoid or hyperbolic tangent, these functions squish values into a range.

So think 0 to 1. For sigmoid it was 1 to 1 for our hyperbolic tangent.

So then when we take their derivatives, the derivatives are always less than one.

And for sigmoid, the derivative is going to be a maximum of 0.25.

Right. Because we have our sigmoid function here. If we take the derivative of that we're going to have a maximum of 0.25.

So why do we care about the derivative of an activation function?

Well, we care about the derivative of our activation function because of backpropagation, right?

Because in chain rule here we have to care about the derivative of our activation function.

So for the derivative of our activation function it's too small.

Then it's going to transform all of this to be really really tiny vanishing gradient.

When we multiply many small numbers together using backpropagation, the result is going to get exponentially smaller.

Small number times small number equals smaller number. Smaller number of times smaller.

Smaller number equals even smaller number. So in the best case scenario, each layer back reduces the gradient by roughly 75%.

Multiply it by 0.25 so that by the time we reached the early layers, the gradient is going to be practically zero.

Okay. So let's look at a simplified example to understand the theory here.

So we start of a last layer and we have a gradient of one.

We move back to the previous layer. We're going to multiply by the sigmoid derivative the derivative of that activation function.

We have to do that back for chain rule. So we're going to assume the maximum derivative of 0.25.

We're going to multiply it by a weight. We're going to assume our weights here are just one.

So our new gradient here is 0.25. Move back another layer.

We're going to multiply our sigmoid derivative again by something less than 0.25.

And our new gradient now is let's say 0.258.25 is going to be 0.0625.

We're going to move back another layer. I'm going to do that again. And now .0625 time Sep 1425 .01 5625I want to repeat that again and again.

And suddenly our gradients had vanished and there were no longer to actually utilize or change those weights earlier in the layers.

So then they become rather useless and training goes kaput.

So solution here. Use the random activation function.

So use sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent at your output.

But then in your hidden layers use that ReLU activation function especially for your earlier layers.

All right. How about exploiting gradients? So exploit ingredients are going to occur when large numbers multiply together.

This most commonly happens with large weight initializations.

Activation functions with derivatives that are greater than or equal to one, like ReLU, or effects that compound in deeper networks.

How are you going to spot these? So your loss is going to fluctuate uh, widely across different training cycles.

So training cycle one, your loss is going to be one thing. And it's very, very different for your next training cycle.

If it's fluctuating a lot, especially as training goes on, it might be that you have an exploding gradient.

If your model weights, if you look at your model weights and they become very large or go to Nan,

then that's also an indication that you might have an exploding gradient. So what you want to do here is you want to reduce your mini batch size.

So if you're using n equals 32 you might want to drop that down to 16 or 8.

You can use something called gradient clipping where you limit the size of the gradients.

Or you can use batch normalization. Questions on exploiting gradients.

Okay. Okay. So so far we've talked about these different training considerations.

We've talked about activation functions. We've talked about loss functions.

Somebody always gets confused between the difference between activation and loss functions.

So make sure to review those because those do become important. Uh choice of optimization algorithm.

We talked about that or adaptive optimizers. We have a couple more things to talk about.

Uh, today, uh, to kick off your neural networks, you have to talk about data splitting.

And we got to talk about regulation. How are we going to prevent overfitting or at least mitigate it?

All right. You guys have seen this before. You're probably gonna see it again.

Until I have a classroom where nobody makes this mistake and project.

But keep putting these signs up there. All right, so you've got your data from Davis and Green.

What are we going to do with our data here? To split it up into three buckets.

We've got our training data here. That's going to be our largest bucket. Then we've got our validation here.

Slightly smaller bucket. And we've got our test data over here.

Even smaller bucket. The test data goes away.

After you have your data. You're going to put this test data somewhere that you can't find it.

If you have it, you may have them put this somewhere and lock it away.

Don't look at it until the very end when you're evaluating all of your different approaches.

Now for you. You're building three different models, right?

You're building a naive approach, a traditional AML approach, and a deep learning approach.

Right. As if you're building those three approaches, this test data should be the same for every one of them.

You should move this test data somewhere and test all three of your models and that same test data.

Yes. Okay. Good. All right.

Well, it's not really quickly about regularization. So neural networks are, as we all know, prone to overfitting.

One of the weaknesses of neural networks that we've talked about. So we often use regularization techniques to try to reduce that risk of overfitting,

try to improve our convergence, make our models train a little bit faster.

So we're going to talk through a few different ones. So one of those is early stopping.

So the model will overfit at some point during training. Absolutely.

If you keep training a model it will overfit at some point.

Um, and so what you usually see in textbooks is something beautiful like this.

Uh, would you see in reality something like this, would you look at a loss curve is just like all over the place.

So we ideally want to stop training when the validation error is at its global minimum.

So you know here they have all these like fun equations where it's like oh the elbow.

Well you just cut it off there. But usually you don't really have an elbow. You have like a weird robot thing that's broken in workplaces.

Um, and so here it's more about up to your judgment, um, where are you going?

To cut it off and. Often what we want to do so good we stop when the validation error begins to increase better.

We want to stop at a global minimum of our validation error. But the best.

And this is what I want you guys to think about. We want to stop at a point that gives the best price performance ratio.

So the optimal ratio of training time to validation error. It might get a little bit better later on here, but you're going to train for a lot longer.

You're going to increase the risk of overfitting. So think about that early stopping.

And how are you going to mitigate the risk of overfitting.

So when we have a large learning rate, this can help us avoid getting stuck in local minima, but it creates the risk of not converging.

And it's been shown that large initial learning rates do reduce overfitting.

So this is again where those adaptive optimizers really come into play.

Or we can do something called the learning rate scheduler. So this is another thing that we could do instead of an adaptive optimizer.

And if you're curious about it you can try it for one of your projects.

So what we do is we start with a higher learning rate and we reduce it as training progresses.

And then the weights approach the optimum. And there are a lot of different methods that we can do here.

We can do a step for you right where we create every step size, as you can see here.

But some factor data. And then you can do um, you can see it's just a couple of lines of code in PyTorch here.

You can also do something called the one cycle learning rate policy. Where are you going to cycle the learning rate over the training.

Changing it after every batch. And so you're going have a small initial learning rate.

It's going to increase to a set max value to k back down to a small value.

And then you're going to use momentum at the same time and cycle inversely to your learning rate.

And that helps balance the regularization a little bit. Okay, so question do learning rates play nice with Adam?

Um. Usually not. So usually you're going to choose either a learning rate schedule or you're going to choose an adaptive optimizer like Adam.

I recommend trying both. Um, just so you can get some experience doing doing both.

Um, you can use a one cycle policy with stochastic gradient descent.

For example, you can use Adam with no learning rate scheduler.

And you can try, um, all kinds of different things. No other forms of virtualization can be used with adaptive optimizers.

So don't think, oh, we can't use regularization with Adam or with an adaptive optimizer.

That's not true. It's just learning rate schedulers. Questions on that.

Okay. We can add regularization via our loss function.

So this is one place where can you do L1 regularization, also called lasso.

This is going to add a penalty equal to the absolute value of the magnitude of the coefficients.

And this is going to encourage sparsity in our model. So many coefficients are going to become exactly zero.

So we got our typical error here. Let's say our mean squared error.

And then we're going to add in a component of regularization there L2 regularization where

ridge is going to add a penalty equal to the square of the magnitude of the coefficients.

And then this is going to encourage a small but non-zero coefficients here.

So these are a couple of different types of regularization you can do just using for a loss function.

Another thing is batch normalization.

And if you built a neural network before, you probably use some kind of batch normalization since it's in like every tutorial online.

So what exactly is it? So we run backpropagation.

The weights of a layer are updated under the expectation that a prior layer outputs has a particular given distribution.

However, the distribution is actually going to shift due to variation across our batch.

It's right that every batch is going to have the same distribution.

So if we're assuming that every batch has the same distribution and it's not, that is going to cause some problems.

And so what we can do is we can use batch normalization.

Um. To standardize the inputs of each layer for each mini batch.

So each layer then sees a consistent distribution of inputs.

So we just standardize it.

Uh, usually we're going to standardize as some inputs before our activation functions that take before the activation function.

And what this does is it really helps speed up and smooth our training process.

So here is just an example. So we've got our input values here.

We're going to normalize to zero mean and variance.

So now we have our normalized values. And now here what's really interesting is we actually have learnable parameters in batch normalization.

So these are learned just like your weights and biases. We're gonna apply learnable parameters that produce a scale and shift.

And so our final output actually is scaled based on portable parameters.

So batch normalization does add a training component when you add this layer into your network in PyTorch or TensorFlow it looks like a layer.

It's not really a layer. Um, so much as almost like a pre a processing step.

However, it does, uh, have learnable parameters in there.

So you are introducing more training aspects.

Now the impact of batch normalization is going to be largest when you combine it with other changes that it enables.

So increasing the initial learning rate, accelerating learning rate decay, reducing the rate decay recognization or removing dropout.

And so when you combine batch normalization with other changes, uh, that makes the impact a little bit better.

Okay. And then last but not least, drop out.

So this is just a fun visualization. Better original network and network with dropout.

We just in dropout we just randomly drop neurons during training.

That's it. Pretty simple. So during each training step, each neuron has a probability of being ignored and sometimes they're just ignored.

So what this does is it forces the network to not rely so much on a single neuron or a single specific set of neurons.

Um, and so it promotes redundancy in your network. And I just really like this visualization.

So there's, um, a website called Lost landscape.com where they've created visualizations, um, for different neural networks.

And you can see here this is uh, with dropout.

And I just love this because you can see all these like places where the neurons were just like removed.

So I think that's just a really fun visualization. There's actually no purpose to it other than just.

It looks cool. All right.

So code resources.

Um, so this week, um, if you're, you know, feeling like, oh, it's a story this semester, I really want to do some interesting stuff.

Uh, you can go in and code your own neural network from scratch, and they're perfect.

You already did. So you're already ahead of the game. That's great. So you can go and augment that if you want.

There's GitHub resources and PyTorch and TensorFlow for creating your own neural network as well as, uh, videos by yours truly.

And then John, uh, talking through the PyTorch and TensorFlow implementations, um,

basic neural networks and all of the different things that we talked about in the class.

So all of these links are available to you before you leave today.

I want you to find a group of 2 to 3 people for your module project one computer Vision.

What you ask yourself are you do you have a mind goals for the module project?

Remember, these module projects are kind of those like big pieces for your portfolio.

So make sure you're choosing somebody that has similar goals to you and you want to work on similar things or do something really interesting.

Talk to people. Come up with a name for your team. Something fun.

If you want to brainstorm ideas and ask me questions in class, I will be here.

So feel free to do so. But before you leave today, make sure to tell me your team name and your team members.

Any questions? Right. About the class neural networks.

My network again. There's videos online for you to watch.

Don't worry. You. I get that question.

Did you? Yeah. All right.

In two weeks, I'm gonna get the opportunity to win one of these trophies.

I want to be one of your teams. Or just by bookmakers.

It doesn't have the same name, Sam. Um, yeah, I think on purpose.

Not talking about. I think it's. A few people know exactly.

How you really got to ask for your time?

Yeah. 0100000.

000.

Oh. Like how you want to be on the job.

Or the guy gonna be one of the things that I'll say.

I don't think you can just carry on like that.

Yeah, there's something about that. I don't know what it is.

So it's okay. As long as we meet other words.

You on the record day, you're.

You're leaking that data. What are you doing? I'm just.

I'm just kidding, you guys. Why do you just ask me?

You know, I was just joking. I was.

I absolutely know it's not only fair, but there's a lot of things, just that you can't do something that's already done there once.

That's not going to be because I want this to be getting anywhere. Right.

Yes. Yeah. Yeah. I would love to hear from the quality.

How? Are you what I saw?

I know, yeah, that was the deadline.

Oh. Okay.

So we need to make this. Work.

This is what we need. Oh, okay.

Well, no need to stress anything. Yeah.

I mean, yes, I do, but. Yeah. It's not right.

Because people are like, hey, look out for us to publish on computer vision.

I don't know. I'm not sure. I'm not the same thing. Come on.

Oh, boy. I'm like, oh, yeah.

I hear you. So.

Yeah. Okay, now I just want to know that. I want you to see that.

Yeah. Oh, dear. Oh, are you good? I like what you're saying.

Oh, that was a joke. I just don't know.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, well, I got you here by yourself.

I know, I know, I know, I know that are part of.

This is awesome. You know, I, I think so I was in.

Your. Bed early in the morning.

Everything all right?

Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I have no idea what she was like.

Uh, yeah. So. All right. What's your team name? I don't know.

I think you guys, I'm talking to the writers. I mean, I'm from what?

I'm going into the garage. Uh, I'll probably stay out because there was no.

Is it left to go? Oh.

You're not. I know what you're doing.

Yeah. Okay. Okay, good.

Yeah. Yeah yeah yeah. Yeah yeah, yeah.

I think it's I think I, you know, I don't know if you have, you have a good day.

Yeah. That's not bad. It's just that.

Yeah, you're right about that.

You will not agree with a guy who.

Has no idea. Oh, yeah. I know.

What do you guys like? Normally, I.

Like to think. Yeah, I think.

I have a bad. Idea.

Oh my gosh. Yes. I'm sorry. What does that mean?

I'm sorry. So. I need you right now.

Oh, that sounds like fun. Yeah.

Anyway, you guys were never seen. Oh, I was, like, with you.

I love you so much. I know, it's not scary.

I'm not ready yet. Yeah. I'm sorry. I hate for Sunday.

Like you said, no to your show.

Or like. Oh, my God, I love you.

Wait, wait. I. Agree.

Oh. That's fine. I thought that's why I said no.

That is my job. Um, that is like, uh oh.

This is only because we can actually make it. I mean, um, I can select the options.

You want to. Do.

Yeah. You see that perfectly. Years from now, you are like, you just be rejected as a.

So you can actually kind of, uh, talk to the.

Yeah. You recognize that a little. Oh, yeah.

Like I'm still a girl. Yeah. I can go play music.

Or, you know. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah.

Yeah yeah yeah yeah.

So. That's a friend of hers.

Hey, brother. You like to have five? Yeah. What is.

More you, uh, model or something?

This other one. I'm actually really smart, so I.

Love, you know, like, I, like I said, these are modules that I'm not really sure.

Oh, there's some other models that I can actually. My heart.

I don't mind your own business. Hi.

How are you there? Mind your own business.

What about that? Yeah. Okay.

What are you going to do? You. Know what is your your everything right?

Yeah. I have never heard.

This one is like anyone else. A lot of people that are amazing, I can't you.

Know I'm not gonna know. Anything about it.

And she. Literally.

You know. It's going to be minimal because much more than any other, you know, I was trying it over the world.

I mean, you know, when.

You go in and start the ones that I just I can't talk about it because.

Because, you know, some even all of you.

Can make it can probably be very hard for me.

To kind of I mean, I haven't seen it.

So that's why you can say. Yeah.

Oh, you. Never fail.

So. Yeah. Oh, right.

So it's like, you know, it's like there's a lot of quality layering.

So it's it's going to be more of like your.

I really like it. I like your own business.

Oh I don't know. I didn't see this go on like you just you, you know what a great deal that is.

Essentially we didn't. Know about that.

Yeah. How do I do that? You got to just be.

Provocative and provocative. What does that look like?

I don't know if you can get some kind of show about.

I don't know what's crazy. About, you know, I went to their five minutes.

Yeah, I think so. And how did you end up?

Like, what do you have?

Uh, Rashida? Uh. Jones? Uh, yeah.

I guess I was going to have to just wait.

I don't know, why would that be that? But this is, uh.

Yeah. Oh, great. Without you, uh. And I know, I know, I'm already surviving on, but I did.

You can go check on my about, like, my chickens.

All my life. I feel like this.

I wouldn't take this seriously. Yeah. I mean, yeah, we can.

We're going to go because I don't I don't feel like. Yeah, it's not like I.

Because I wanted to show that that's an ensemble method.

Do you know what your team members. I mean, We need to come up with the outcome.

Is definitely hard. Can we just love this moment?

No. Yeah. Ready? I don't want to come back to that.

Is that the one? I don't know why that is.

Yeah, I think that I should just fill this out for you.

All right, so this is a smaller model. I don't get the joke, but I know it's one of the model.

I didn't even want you to do anything related to me.

So I decided we should. I mean, I can do that as well.

So, what do you think? So I've been on this side, which is.

Are you out there? Yeah. 42 the lady did mercy.

So me. I can't even keep this reasonable.

I was forced. So I guess you could say that's the random people.

It. Or is there a space if you're good at it, you know. That's good.

Like, we could make our own even. I guess we have.

You got. Really? Oh, I think there's always a small problem.

Well, what do we just for lunch? I'm sorry.

Yeah, we're actually going to go, but I'm not. Yeah, she was here yesterday at, uh.

This is a guy who. He went to an image class. I think it's hot.

Well, yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

I don't think you just gotta do random. Uh, yeah. Uh, just.

Yeah or. No. He was, like, closer. And he has to do, uh, I know there would be some sort of some sort of extra work.

Those are the topics. I have an idea. I think you guys are going to go anywhere to do.

I don't want to get stole the data. So you absolutely have.

Nobody wants to kill. Well, I'm going to be okay, so it's perfect.

Both you and Ryan Ryan's like, this is like, you know, there's some of these kids really about quitting my class.

You don't get the project, see what he's like. But I put the hammer down.

Yeah. Uh, so I was like, have you ever considered that we should.

I don't know, I feel like if I was a professor, I would see the amount of work every single day.

I would assign a day's work for that. Oh, yeah, I would have a lot I want to learn.

Which I to ask because I know based on what I think, it's hard to get other.

Yeah. You're like, uh, yeah, I'm giving up here, bro.

It was okay. It is Christmas for me.

Oh, yeah. Where was it?

Pretty pricey. There. I will tell the difference. I was I imagine you are just curiosity.

Yeah, usually I couldn't afford that. I was like, did you guys stay away?

But I thought it would make more sense if you're up there.

I usually the socio economic general area.

It's like in the heart of what I'm typing, there's actually not too bad. There we go.

Yeah. The Bidens, for all the guys that we kind of love. The problem.

Yeah. Right. Yeah I think uh, yeah. Cuz like the other classes.

Like, yeah. I read an audience last time and that was nice.

Nobody was like, oh, I see, like this time to go off like that.

There's a quick question about the. Okay.

Um, so this is about this. Yeah. I remember we were talking about, you know, I got to find the perfect.

I, I think she's gonna do the best, but.

Yeah, but it's, uh, it's opens up. It's validation when, uh, you've had this one stop here and then let's go up with this one like.

No, no, no, I think that, like I said, that was the one moment this is typically what.

Oh, right. This is sort of the one model where student training you have your validation activity.

Now before I do that, I'm going to stop you going out because you're overfitting to.

What do you what do you want to do. Any kind of losses run down your training data for worse.

And that's what I'm sorry. How did you memorize the training?

Oh, I, I just kind of like telling you this on how well it works on, like, you guys, you know, you kind of in the paper.

It is. I guess I was doing badly.

Um, so that you're. So. That's what it's really about? Um, I don't know.

If they can tell you. Because.

So you can have one. Okay. What are you talking about? So I added, it's different.

I guess I was in a class. So you guys.

Actually didn't get me really good results. I wasn't guessing anymore.

But then I went on, and it did. Oh, you did find better parameters like, you know.

Okay, well, what happened was, like, you can go like, you know, got here and you go into it a little bit.

Then it got down like this was like. And then I let it go. You don't got it.

Oh my God. One more quote unquote.

I guess that means we were able to like, even though, you know, we of course, I just.

I, I just I don't think so. I was like, I think they did.

Something wrong? I'm sure because I know that, you know, it was.

You know what I. Thought you said it went over like 100.

Like you have what? She was good, right?

Oh, yeah, I. I think it's good.

Yeah, I, I think it's a good idea.

Yeah, I know, but I'm sure you can do it together.

You need the people who. Are much competition.

Yeah. I mean, about me. It's like Christian and I usually chat, and that's also what I like you're doing.

You know, I read what God has done, and then it's very, like, cohesive.

What do you mean? It's something like, you know, like the materials.

Understand? Like, uh, like.

All right, that's good, because I never.

I had no idea that the last time, you know, like that, you spend so much time understanding theory and everything, but then you know it.

Maybe I had no idea that. The data that I got.

What do you think? It's all right there. Yeah, I wasn't expecting that.

So, like, you know, like, what do we do? Going to the rescue.

I just it doesn't have to be. Hard because.

It's like just just because you have, like, everything that I think I know.

I ask you a question. I know I'm definitely like, oh, that's so there's no way.

Yeah. I mean my x r squared.

And like I was like, although you know what I mean because like I have an understanding of reality for lost.

Oh really? I don't even understand I thought that.

I didn't even know that they were like. So you need to the longest actually still like it, but at least, you know, it was like the loss for the first.

Uh, so technically you can use those as a loss function. They're not, you know, experiments towards function.

They're like, oh yeah.

Yeah, exactly. And sometimes but it seems like there are some ways you can modify the mostly.

The agents of the. Kind around loss function is supposed to be so as we go so far.

So like your data set. So you know your your your your mind with regards to each other.

Yeah. That's a um. But also like, you know, I was I started with a zero machine learning experience,

as I'm sure you know, like, you know, saying you can't get everything.

You know, I want to I know you're R-Ohio.

You know, I mean, to me. And you'll learn a lot.

Of course. Yeah, but, you know, I have no idea what I did.

I say, I'll see you in. Yeah? Yeah.

You all right? So. Yeah. I mean, so you're gonna have to go.

Yeah. You're. Very efficient.

Okay, so you just go. Yes. No. I'm just asking you.

I'm sorry. Yeah. Let's say you. You calling the place?

Yeah, I'm not sure. Oh, so I understand.

Oh, sure. Or what about you? Yes, I think I was just like you.

You're gonna fall. Oh, yeah. And there's only reason for using this one.

I really feel like a pretty boy. You can hear very well. Isn't everything?

That's not. Is it?

Really? Does it burn the house down to that scope?

Yeah. Yeah. I'm guessing. And we'll start all over again.

I mean, I think, I mean, I'm. Not sure if this works for.

Yes. What we're trying to do. You know what I mean?

How's it going in there? What about something?

What are you talking about? I was like, didn't you think? Just like you did this school.

Middle school? But we had to be like. Yeah, like I was an individual, just like you.

Like, what if we did something wrong? Oh, well.

Yeah. I like how electrical you are there.

And there's pros and cons. Oh, yeah.

That means interacting. It's just like.

Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

So I see, I got it. I did it. Did you.

Say something? No, I did already.

You're probably the only reason I did that.

Oh, yeah. I didn't know what else I can say because you only have so much.

Yeah. Do you want to do that? Oh, yeah.

If you get to, you know, make three and you're like, plenty of times you can always add on to it.

I think that's a well, you know, I don't know. I don't know.

Um. Am I still producing? Yeah.

Yeah, yeah. Later today I'm writing. Um, let me add you.

Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, that's probably what I open to.

I think that we probably will. Yeah. You saw the over the last five years.

Um. You know, so this is this is what I was doing Christmas over.

Yeah. It's wonderful. So are you ready to to thank you so much.

For joining us. I think it's fair to say that what I'm talking about here.

This isn't just okay. You should be able to see that.

Yeah. I mean, I wasn't really crazy because, like, you know, I was like, yeah, I was like, you know.

Yeah. I mean, spring semester, just like I was thinking, what, what what would we do?

But yeah. Or Orlando, I remember from last week I was like, okay, my grandpa lives like right near Disney.

So I would always go when I was little. That was so fun. Yeah.

My son is like a baby. Um, like, what was that?

Yeah, that's that's part of it.

Um, I wanted to ask you about that. Yeah, that was different.

Yeah. So typical. In an independent study, I just asked you what you want to do so that we have something documented.

Yeah, we have a label data set. And just let me know when you want to tell me a little bit more, but like I've done every before,

and then I guess in the morning and again, I feel like every week is just too much.

Yeah. So every other week, if you want to like more classes, if you want to come up at the end of classes,

and I have this chat about what's going on in my calendar.

Perfect. Yeah. And I feel like first we have like a first quarter, like, official meeting to kind of flesh it out because I have a proposal for it.

Oh, perfect. So just to, like, see how I was like, oh, my God, this is a look at all my stuff.

So I wish I could write, but, you know, just it's like, yeah, yeah.

So you have class tomorrow on Thursday night at that and on Thursday.

Yeah. 430 and will veto you between like but enforcement.

No it's midnight. Why are you saying I don't have anything.

Um. Yeah. Yeah, yeah.

It's it's down here because there's no, um. I'm going to take a moment to answer your.

Yeah. No, actually, you go somewhere else, but I think, um.

Oh, yeah, I'm sure I would love that. So, like, almost everyone this week is going to have to do this or like.

We'll we'll hear what you mean. Um, three different one way.

Right. She wants her to be perfect. Okay, perfect.

This is how teachers are. And so can I just say to you, it's so.

I feel like when you are reading, I'm not sure what I do.

Oh, my word for it is you get another one. And like a lot of like, it also points to like how it was helpful.

Like most of you have. Oh yeah. Yeah. Because it's been a while.

Yeah yeah yeah. It's just I like to do this lecture because I wish to build upon.

Oh, yeah. Actually, this semester I get a little bit more new stuff, but today is usually a good start.

You know, kind of like these big. And here's our program.

Um, and then we go, I've been in our projects for more coding.

Exactly. And then the hackathons, music like doing it interest free time for questions to like okay.

So that gives you guys your time to work on your projects, have some structure around it.

But then also because you are just myself and or Stuart. Okay.

So one advice or big question, be here for each of the hackathons.

And I ask this question. So it's the idea to like picture right before the happy on and work on it if you want to start leading on it.

And so either way so the hackathons are structured. So I'm assuming most people.

Yeah. And so that's kind of be a good starting point okay.

You know what I was finding too is people to go in projects together like a few days before.

So I thought if we do a happy hour, please don't hurt me.

So I said, oh, nice. Nice. Yeah, exactly. You got to work through some of the challenges that are important for that particular.

So okay. And then I got another idea.

Um, you said you'd like me to do that. So how is that so usually the problem like, is or has a great function,

it really is dependent on how to say, okay, um, but he I can probably give you more information.

I think he has a five or so that you can run it through.

Yes, I guess, yeah. He's like I mentioned that before. I say time you need a I just don't really understand how that actually is.

Just like walking into somebody else's computer. Okay. Computer. Oh okay.

Yeah. Yeah. And then you use it on certain days you mess up on your training, your model on that other computer that you can just log into and access.

Okay. Yeah. Thank you. Oh, weird. But I see that I've got to use.

Which one? Wow. That looks cool. Yeah.

Would you like to do both? I would love to. Okay.

Yeah. I think you guys. That's going to go. Yeah. Sorry.

Are you with a lot of people? Oh, didn't. Okay.

I'll see you later. I don't I think that your sister's advice. How is it that.

You guys like you? How did you like Dubai?

Like, I feel like. Thing is, I know when I was nice, but because I like more power generators.

There's not much history where you go to Europe. There's so much history like that.

You guys like a very much more skyscraper existence.

And then there's like a know sandstorm, like someone nearby.

Those guys are so interesting. Okay, so the airport, you guys would have been, like, in our class.

Yeah, I know that too. Also, Dubai's is very expensive.

Yeah, yeah. It's crazy. You know, it's. Yeah.

I mean, I guess that's right. Yeah.

I mean, I mean, and then the quality wise is really good, but they taking your Emirates.

Maybe you're not. Really. Yeah. So you certainly think it's over for like some there.

It's like our computer vision thing. Yeah.

Posture is cool. But you have to turn off right there on the internet.

Thank you. To the internet.

And that is it. Why?

You see, like I checked in in Boulder. Oh.

Know how much do you know about the models here? I don't know, I mean, it's really it's not me dangerous.

Oh, wait, I want to try. Are you guys going to try? Is it not?

Yeah, maybe I start. Oh, okay.

This is ambitious. That's just not you. It's. I think, um.

Well, I've been working on it on the side. Okay.

And, um, I'm trying to, like, challenge, like in my research, like the self supervising school part, so.

Oh, my. This is so good. Um, for images at least.

So is that, um, like, the convention is that you're trying to learn features within a greater package, like,

it's fine for people when they touch an elephant and they touch the tail in the truck, they think it's different things.

Um, so you have these different crops for like one image, which I like is trying to emulate image.

And I was like, oh, that was so bad. Context. Yes.

And then you bring. Oh my God. Those are things I thought I was teaching.

Oh. Um. But I'm trying to. I'm trying to think of a name for, like, a labeling task or a prediction task.

Oh, yeah. He asked for an image from the same label, but now I'm trying to bring a view from that label to I really.

I really think, uh, I need to go eat my lunch and minimize that from eating and treating it like, immediately this moment.

That's cool. Uh, the same with Buddha. Yeah. Um.

