[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
All the time. All right. You guys are just over a weekend.

You're probably going to all of your classes at this point. How's it going? Going okay.

You've seen all of the projects and assignments you have for this semester. I feel in about everything.

I'm going to need a lot of sleep. Okay. That's good.

Yeah, sleep is good for it. Stay hydrated.

Stay sleepy.

This semester seems to be all about, like, careful planning the people who get to the end of the semester, and they're like, I'm totally fine.

And they submit their final project early. Always the ones who just started planning from the very beginning.

It's very important to get everything. That's not the vast majority of students.

I will say that the majority of folks end up waiting for the last possible second to do everything, and that runs into some challenges.

We've got an interesting thing going on with this desk in the back. You guys have merged into some kind of super desk to know what's going on here.

And like this. What I do is I. Put a lot in that.

All right, so Danny's here. So now we can get started. Yes.

All right. So, uh, today is our first official day in computer vision.

Before I kick off, any questions on neural networks that have been burning in the back of your mind for the last week?

Is that. All right.

We can go ahead and jump in. Okay. So we're going to do an intro to computer vision today.

We're going to talk a little bit about traditional computer vision.

And the reason that I do this is because most people I think somebody here can't remember exactly who was like,

how do we do that with a traditional machine learning model? Well, I'm going to tell you how to do that today.

Um, so you know how to do a traditional machine learning model for computer vision?

Uh, we won't dive into that super deeply because it's not deep learning, which is the point of the course.

But since you have to do it, I'm going to give you a little bit of some hints on how to do that without spending all of your time here.

And then we're going to talk about convolutional neural networks.

Uh, we're going to talk about a convolution. What it is. We're going to talk about the neural network.

Um, and then we're going to talk about some different CNN architectures going all the way from AlexNet,

Net and AlexNet all the way to some of the more modern ones.

And then next week we're going to get into more architectures.

Lastly, today we're going to talk about, uh, implementation of CNN.

We're going to talk about transfer learning and data augmentation, which is going to roll right into your hackathon next week.

And in the following week we'll talk about more CNN architectures.

Okay. So any questions on what we've got going on today?

We're going to take two ten minute breaks today to kind of break up the lecture a little bit.

So we're going to get through convolutional convolution.

And convolutional neural networks are going to take a break and talk about CNN architectures.

We're going to take a break. And then we're going to talk about implementation of CNN's.

All right. Cool. Let's get started. All right.

So computer vision, uh, like I mentioned last week, is everything that has to relate to any kind of images or videos.

So think image recognition. So facial recognition or product identification or examples like this.

We've got object detection autonomous driving manufacturing agriculture.

This is really fun. This is a spill detection of a spill inside of a manufacturing um facility.

We've got image segmentation. Image segmentation is used for a lot of different applications.

Um, autonomous driving being one of them, but also medical imaging, um, object tracking and motion analysis and then things like surveillance here.

Uh, sports tracking is a really fun application of motion analysis and then scene reconstruction.

So in architecture, VR and AR 3D modeling, we have this idea of scene reconstruction that we can do use computer vision.

And all of these are just a few of the many, many examples where we use computer vision in the real world.

Today, we're primarily going to talk about two different aspects of computer vision.

We're going to talk about classification, which is your typical hot dog not hot dog problem.

And then we're going to talk about object detection which incorporated within object detection

is going to be bounding boxes object masking image segmentation and keypoint detection.

Now we're going to get into a lot more details into this stuff in our next lecture.

All right let's talk about some challenges with computer vision.

Thoughts on some challenges. Yeah, that's what I feel like.

Most images have a lot of noise and a lot of irrelevant information.

Great. Yeah. So there's almost like a sparsity of information when you look at an image of

what you're trying to actually get out of that image versus all of this other,

what do you call noise? Yeah, that's great image.

Data from the real world is really complex and messy. So think occlusions, lighting, background pose, perspective, all of this stuff changes.

Other challenges with images. Yeah, Tiffany is basically I said,

but I saw an example where one image was a unicorn and the other the real world image was a horse in front of a lifeboat.

So it's like because of that background, you can easily get confused to be something else.

Being able to differentiate can be hard sometimes. Yeah, absolutely.

Yeah. If you've ever looked at any of those, like optical illusion type images in your brain gets confused.

Um, computer vision models get confused a lot more than your brain does say that.

But yeah, interpreting depth and spatial relationships in images is not always easy.

To your point, Tiffany, there's also this need for very large and usually labeled data sets.

Um, yeah. So this need kind of held back the field for a very long time because people didn't

realize that they needed very large labeled data sets in order to do this properly.

And then in some applications, like autonomous driving, there's a need for inference to be very fast.

So think you're driving. You have to make a split second decision when a dog runs out in the road.

Right. And so for you your brain is processing and it does it really fast.

We need a computer vision model to be able to do that just as fast.

I've worked on a variety of different computer vision projects.

One of the projects that I worked on was with a fitness company that had this type of mirror like device,

and they were experimenting with computer vision in the home of doing different types of pose estimation to tell people how good their

poses were for like different types of yoga or lots or different types of exercises to see if they were doing an exercise appropriately,

and to also count reps and do a bunch of other random things.

What we found in this project was that image data is really, really,

really messy because this is what all of the when when you first create this first data set right and you build your models off of it,

it's all like, you know, curated trainers in their rooms, you know, in their studios doing stuff.

And it looks very much like this. But in the real world, you think about your home and where you might do exercise at home, it's very messy.

There's like a lamp over here. There's a pile of books here. There's like a cat running across the screen.

And when are you having to put this out in the real world? And we got data from the real world.

That's what we saw, right? People that always have the mirror in a perfect orientation.

You know, sometimes it was kind of like leaning. At other times it was like a bunch of stuff was stacked up next to it.

And so you didn't get a full picture. And then there's just occlusions everywhere.

And so somebody like, you know, their couch is here, and then they're like halfway behind the couch.

So all you see is their arm. And all of this has to be thought about when you're deploying something in the real world.

Because if you're telling people that this thing works in the real world,

and not getting that many types of constraints can be really, really tricky to build these models,

it's really important to get your data from the real world if you want to be able to deploy it there,

because there's so many challenges when you do put this stuff in the real world.

Yes, know. So this might be a stupid question,

but just keep the computer vision like know the difference between the person and the person in the mirror because like,

I guess that's I guess that's why the question in my mind, like when you're when you're training it, like,

how does it know the difference between like because they both look like people, you know what I mean?

It's a great question. So our camera was mounted here. Um, and so you never sees the mirror, I guess, unless you have another VR across the room.

Yes. Then it would probably get a little bit confused.

But because we're from the focal point of the mirror, looking out at the person we don't actually see too.

Yeah, it's a good question. Uh, so one thing that we did, uh, for this project was we also created a lot of synthetic data.

And so this was synthetic data with a variety of different backgrounds.

Um, and this led to another project where we put people in different types of rooms that

we had a lot of different occlusions and random household items that we could.

We actually had a scale for messiness of a room. Or we could scale up the messiness of a room or, um, I make the messiness of the room very small.

So the room was very clean. Uh, so here's just a few examples.

Um, the cool thing about building out a synthetic data set is that you can get all kinds of different labels,

and these are picture perfect labels, right? And they're all automatically generated so we can get all kinds of different poses.

Uh, key points, um, and three dimensional bounding boxes, which is pretty cool to be able to get uh, using our synthetic data set.

We use a synthetic data set to do a lot of our pre-training,

and then did a lot of testing on real world data and eventually incorporated a lot of that real world data into our models.

We did all of this work for like a year, and then they decided that they didn't want to go with computer vision,

I guess some kind of privacy thing being in people's homes.

Um, which is funny because the, um, I have I actually have two years in my house because I worked on this project.

And so, uh, it's funny because they have like a social media thing.

So you can actually, like, be on video and like, like send it to your social media all within it.

So it's kind of funny that privacy from like, uh, getting the number of reps is like a no no,

but people can opt into putting their entire workout on social media if they want to.

Okay, here's another project that I worked on.

Uh, and in this project, I was working with an interior design firm, and what they wanted to do was to be able to take an image that looked like this,

that a customer would send them and then segment out specific pieces of furniture.

So basically, like draw a box around this little chest, remove it and replace it with a new piece of furniture.

So this is something that they usually do by hand.

Um, and so they'll go in like sketch a room or take pictures and then place things in that room and they'll have this whole like storyboard.

They wanted to be able to do all of this using AI, um, which was a pretty interesting problem to work on, especially back in 2023,

uh, when all of this stuff was like pretty new, like segment anything model had just come out, for example.

So this seems like a doable problem until you get into a lot of real world considerations like,

um, this is an actual segmentation using the segment anything model on this photo.

And you can see a lot of problems. Um, so if you just wanted to remove this, unfortunately, um, the curtain is kind of like attached to it here.

And there's all of these weird edges of all the stuff that's sitting on top of here.

So if you just remove this thing, the legs are here, and then there's like this weird lamp here,

and then you have to superimpose some feedback in, which gets really tricky.

Another question is do you segment out each pillow individually or do you segment that segment them as a group?

And here you have like mixtures between different pieces of furniture and the floor.

And if you wanted to replace this bed that would be problematic.

And you have to go in and clean up because you have to erase this and erase some of this.

But then part of the wall is missing. So if you're using AI, you need to impact the wall.

So it gets really, really complicated very fast when you think about how this would actually be used in the real world.

Okay. So let's talk a little bit about what our data looks like. And we've done this a little bit back in 510.

So we won't spend too long here. But reminder you know it's been it was a long break.

So reminder that when we look at an image it's broken down into a bunch of different pixels.

Those tiny little dots, each pixel has three numbers red, green and blue.

You might also use a grayscale image.

Um, so for your particular application, this might look different, but for most of us it's going to be red, green and blue.

So each pixel is going to have corresponding three numbers.

So it's going to what your data is going to look something like this where you have uh, 1920 columns, 1080 rows.

All of these represent a pixel. And then you're going to have three channels per pixel, a red channel, a green channel and a blue channel.

And each of those are just going to contain a number. So you basically have this giant matrix where each pixel has three channels.

Okay, so this is a very brief and non-exhaustive review of traditional computer vision.

We're going to talk about engineering features and traditional machine learning models.

You may choose when you're doing the traditional modeling portion of your project,

which before I introduced this last year as part of the lecture, people gave me all kinds of weird stuff for this.

And so this is how you would actually do it from a traditional perspective, and how this was actually done before deep learning became popular.

All right. So you can actually do a lot of feature engineering from images.

So you can do color histograms. So calculating the distribution of colors in different colored spaces.

You can look at colored moments of like statistical measures things like meaning and standard deviation skewness of your color channels.

You could extract dominant colors. So extracting the most prevalent colors here or do something called color coherence vectors,

which is where you're distinguishing between large similarly colored regions and then small isolated regions.

So almost doing like a segmentation of colors. So these are some color based features.

There's also texture based features. So we can do something called a gray level co-occurrence matrix or Geochem which is

going to capture some of those spatial relationships of your pixel intensities.

We also have local binary patterns, which is going to encode local texture patterns by comparing your pixel intensities.

Um, so especially if you have a lot of different textures within an image to think like grass next to like pavement, right?

Um, you're able to actually encode a lot of that using local binary patterns, because you can look at those local texture patterns within an image.

We have neighbor filters here, which analyze texture patterns at different scales and orientations,

and then features which are basically statistical measures derived from your gray level co-occurrence matrix here.

You can do your standard statistical features like mean variance and standard deviation of your pixel intensities.

Uh, you can do measures of entropy, of image complexity.

Uh, we have something called the Nike moment, which is just a fun word to say.

Um, and what that means is it's a rotation invariant descriptor.

Uh, that's based on some polynomial decomposition going along with our decomposition as wavelet transforms.

So you can do multi-scale analysis of image features. Um, and do wavelet transforms on those.

So, uh, lots of different features that you could engineer here.

And you can choose, um, some of these, or you could choose to engineer all of these and then do a feature engineering and extraction process.

Um, and nicely, because people came before you and built all of this out into Python verifies,

um, libraries that give you access to be able to engineer a lot of these features.

Most of these features you're not going to have to do by hand. We also have some fun shape features.

Um, so this is getting a little bit more detailed. Um, so things like edge detection, like Sobel and Canny.

Um, this allows us to identify boundaries of objects. So then if you wanted to make a coloring page of, like any image,

you could just do a Sobel or Canny detector on it, and it basically finds the edges of the entire image.

And then you could go and color it in. We can do different contour descriptors like shape signatures and chain codes.

Uh, we have something called a hue moment, uh, where, uh, we have shape descriptors that are invariant to rotation, scale and translation.

Uh, some of the, I guess newer ones, which are still like 20 years old, uh, we've got scale invariant feature transform.

And what this does, is it going to detect keypoints and then can you compute descriptors that are robust to some serious transformations.

We've got a faster alternative because of course if you shift something and you want to be able to surf it and do it faster.

And then lastly we've got hog um, histogram of oriented ingredients, which is going to help us capture global shape information.

And we're gonna do that through looking at creation directions. And here's a picture of what this is.

So here is our grayscale image here. And you can see different operators, um, that uh, allow us to be able to look at the edges of an image.

So this is actually the operator for example, I and these are actually, um, we're very frequently used um, instead of doing segmentation.

And so that when I showed you the picture of the bedroom, uh, we actually did use a lot of these, like more traditional, uh, approaches to,

uh, looking at the edges of things, especially for quality detection to see how well our segment Anything model was working at the time.

Yeah. Let's see, when you're working on projects like that with the furniture,

do you typically go through all of them or is there like a standard like first

you should try these two because I assume they can be very time consuming.

That is a great question. Um, I would never do a traditional machine learning model approach.

Um, in the real world, uh, that is to say, there are some people who might say, oh, well,

you know, I want to build an AI model to give me color in pictures whenever I have an image.

And then that's like, it would be really silly to build a whole, like deep learning network to do that.

When you have something like a canny operator, and all of it has a bunch of parameters that can be tuned,

so you can make it look more like a coloring book than it is here.

Um, so, you know, there's simple things like that, but you can definitely use this stuff for, um, but for that type of project.

Yeah, I would I go directly to the deep learning approach. Now, I did argue with them and try to get them to consider naive approaches to the problem.

Um, but I lost that battle and ended up doing a deep learning approach.

All right. So these models hopefully look very familiar to you.

Yes. Okay, good. I got a couple nods. So at least a couple of you were paying attention in John's class.

It's great. Um, okay, so I have this table here where you have these different models,

and then what it's going to work well for from a traditional machine learning approach, computer vision, where we've got support vector machines.

Um, this is going to be particularly effective with those hog and sift features.

So when's it going back to your question around like how do you choose or what if it's going to be based on which model you want to use?

Um, so think high dimensional feature space is, uh, binary and multi-class image classification.

You can use, uh, SVM score if you have limited training data.

And SVM can be pretty useful here. Uh, random forest.

Um, you will use a random forest if you have very feature types, because it can handle a lot of different types of features.

Uh, if you have high dimensionality of your image features.

The nice thing about Random Forest and similarly with gradient boosting is I have kind

of has a built in importance ranking that helps you identify which features are,

uh, the most useful, which can be really helpful when you're doing that feature engineering.

It's resistant to overfitting. When you ask, do you use diverse feature sets, which is really nice.

Cans, um, are really great for, like, image retrieval tasks.

So you want to go in, retrieve um, a specific image contents can be really helpful here because you're basically plotting out,

um, in your feature space, all of these different images that you have, and then you can go and select those.

Decision trees. Good interpretability for understanding which features matter most.

Um can be very useful for understanding feature thresholds in image classification.

If you really want to understand your images, build a decision tree.

Um, based on the, um, image classification task you have, because it can be really interesting and helpful, uh, to,

uh, pull out that information and look at like what features are important in determining your specific classes.

It's not going to work as well as your deep learning,

but it is going to give you a lot more information about what is interesting or in that particular classification problem.

And then we've got good old XGBoost, uh, which of course has a lot of these, um, similar, uh, works well for as a random forest, um,

but can help with scaling and allows us to, um, uh,

combine different weak learners based on different feature types so we can do a lot to actually boost as well.

So these are the models that I would expect you to probably choose when doing your traditional machine learning approach.

You can choose outside of this and people sometimes do.

This is just kind of that quick and dirty table to give you an idea of what's possible.

Questions. Yeah.

When you say like pass feature types into a model, lets say you want to pass features into a random forest.

Does that mean like say I have like a soul outline of a picture?

You just pass in like that, that mask into it?

Pretty much. Yeah. So there'll be basically a number representation um, that can here.

So we'll mask. And then that is what you put in as a feature. Okay.

And you can do it a variety of different ways. But you probably do it by channel.

So you'd have a different feature in each channel. Okay. And you just stack the channels.

Okay. Another thing that's really interesting, um, if you wanted to try,

is you can use a neural network as a feature extractor and then take the output of

a convolutional layer or multiple convolutional layers and put that as an input.

So we're going to talk about this, but you can put that in as an input into one of these models as well.

So you can use that as your feature extractor if you want to, which is kind of fun.

As you have probably already guessed. Um, we got some challenges here.

Uh, feature engineering is pretty hard. Uh, it's very limiting to think about.

Okay, we have this image, and now we've broken it down into red, green and blue.

And then we are basically just doing a bunch of statistical computations, looking at edges, looking at different pixel intensities.

And that's not as informative, um, as maybe what you want for your particular application.

Often requires domain expertise. Uh, traditional features are often losing your spatial relationships between pixels.

It's really hard to capture some of those hierarchical scales, um, or patterns at different scales,

and it can be really hard to handle object deformation variation.

A lot of challenges with that. A lot of challenges with generalizability are hard to capture.

There's very high level abstract patterns that you may have in your images, and feature computation becomes pretty expensive at high resolutions.

Then you have these like massive high dimensional feature spaces that you're

trying to put into one of these models that maybe is challenging to scale.

Okay. So that brings us then to deep learning.

The point of this class where we're going to go from the original image, and we're going to put that into a neural network.

So now we're not going to do any feature engineering. All right.

So last week we talked we gave an intro to neural networks.

We talked about the basic, uh, layer of a neural network, the multi-layer perceptron.

Um, and this week we're going to be talking about a different type of architecture.

Now let's say that we did want to put our input image. So let's say we have a very small input image.

It's only 228 pixels by 228 pixels. This is really small.

Um, and of course we have three channels, right. So it's going to look like this.

This is our input image. And we want to put that through a fully connected layer.

So this is the layers that we were talking about in our neural networks last week okay.

So if we want to put this into our fully connected layer and we're going to connect all of those into this layer, then.

Ah, and we have, we're going to have 155,952 weights to work.

By. Let's say we have, um, ten of these filters in our layer or ten layers here so that then it's going to be hot.

And then we're going to add our ten biases for each of those. We're going to have over 1 million weights that we're going to have to work.

So very, very large and are fully connected layers.

So that brings us to convolutional neural networks then, which allows us to significantly reduce the number of parameters that we're learning here.

Because now, instead of having a fully connected layer where everything is connected back to each of our pixels in this input image,

now we have a convolutional layer and we're going to talk about convolution in just a minute.

But this convolutional layer allows us to um, slide over our input image.

And so now we have three by three by three and then again by ten.

Now we have 280 weights to learn. So for the exact same input image we can learn over a million weights.

Or we can learn only 280 weights, which is actually much, much more efficient.

And how do we actually go about doing this? But we do this through a process called convolution.

And convolution is kind of a can be tricky to kind of wrap your brain around.

I like to think of convolution as a sliding window operation across multiple dimensions.

So I'm sure in John's class you guys did some kind of sliding window operation when you were doing some kind of feature engineering.

You're going to slide window over basically like a filter, and then you're going to do some computation.

So think of convolution as just like a sliding window operation across multiple multiple dimensions.

Now. When we think about it in terms of one dimension of dimension.

So here we have some time series data. And so we have three axes.

Here we have our x axis, our y axis and our z axis.

And this basically if you have an accelerometer and you move it around like this, just like when we had on our Arduinos,

we're going to get an X, y and z coordinate when we are moving something around.

So when we do a 1D convolution, what we're doing is we're applying a filter over this data and we're called the kernel.

And we're going to slide this over our data. So convolution here is a smaller array that we call a kernel or filter.

And we're going to slide it across the signal.

So at each position here it's going to calculate a weighted sum of the kernels values with the values of the signal that it's covering here.

And then this, like window is going to move along the entire width of our signal.

Transforming it into a new filtered signal. So this is it in one dimension.

We're just going to go across the data like this. And then we're going to make those computations across these three axes.

Yeah. I think I might have missed this.

But the filter that's like the bias that we were talking about speakers at different you know, so that's different.

So that's something totally new this week. So this filter concept that we're learning is completely new in as part of the convolutional

architecture is we're taking a filter convolution operation across our signal.

And so let's say instead of. Connecting everything.

So we're connecting all of these weights, um, in our layer to every pixel in our input image.

Now we're just creating a filter, and we're sliding that filter over and doing computations.

And this filter is composed of weights that then we can learn.

And how did we get there. So that's something that you choose when you're setting up a um a model.

Yeah. Great question. Okay, so I have a one deconvolution visualizer for you so you can kind of look and see, um, what this does.

Let's take a look. And this is also in, uh in canvas if you want to take a look.

Okay. So we've got our input signal here. So this is just an array.

We can see that this is like heart rate signal. Or this could be an accelerometer signal or it's just a one dimensional array here.

This is our input signal. And then here is our kernel.

And so this kernel we're going to slide across our input signal.

And then we're going to take the calculations here. And we're going to basically do a summation process.

And so we'll see what this looks like. So kernel is going to be sliding over.

You can see in blue where it's sliding over and where our current calculations are.

So we're doing um zero times 0.51 times zero zero.

And then two times -0.5, which is going to be negative one.

This sum is negative one. And so in our output it's going to be placed here.

We're going to slide by one. So go one over.

And you can see here our kernel stayed the same. But now we are moved across our input signal.

And so now would you point five times 1.50 times two zero.

Negative point five times one negative point five. We sum these together and we get zero.

So that's what we put here at the output. We're going to continue doing this.

And so again we're going to go across do our multiplication do or addition and move across the entire visualization.

Yeah. Mike. Um quick question one with the numbers from the input signal.

Absolutely. Yeah. Does zero represent like a color or what does the input signal actually like.

The numbers in that uh, signal actually represent. This is just a conceptualization.

It could be anything. So you can replace this with 60, 61, 62, 61 is like your heartbeat.

Or you could put in here accelerometer.

We're only doing one to you right now to kind of introduce the concept of convolution.

And then we'll move to 2D which will be images. But right now this is just a 1D convolution.

So we're just uh showing what happens when we put a kernel over an input signal and make that computation.

Yeah. But you um, it's convolution mostly just for efficiency.

Or is it off for like, other generalization purposes or it offers a lot of different benefits, which we'll talk about later on.

Yeah. And great question. Is that like, um, um, is it similar to our compression algorithm.

Um, yeah. Exactly. This in a file. Yep.

So you can think of convolution as a type of compression. Exactly.

If you're into like transforms as well, like different types of transforms,

convolution is very similar to a lot of transforms, especially in the compression space.

Yeah. Okay, so that's one deconvolution.

And I like to do one deconvolution. So we can kind of see okay how is this computed in one dimension.

And then we move to two dimensions. So images of course are two dimensions.

So the idea is going to be similar. But we're going to extend it down to two dimensions.

So you can see here. Now instead of just having a filter that is one dimension.

Now we have a filter that is in two dimensions. So now our sliding window, our kernel moves across both the height and width of our image.

And then at each position it's still going to calculate that weighted sum of our pixel values that are covered by this window.

So it's the exact same thing it did in 1D. But now it's just going to do it across a larger space that's in two dimensions.

So of course, I also have one of these visualizations in two dimensions for you guys to look at.

Also in canvas if you're following along there. Okay, so we've got a bigger space now right.

So we have our image up here. So now we'll say that this um, all of these are some kind of normalized pixel value.

Right. So these are let's say normalized red. All of these are normalized red values here.

We're going to apply our kernel across these. And so blue is where our kernel is sitting on now.

And then we can do our current calculations that we see we've got negative one and zero here is going to be zero.

We've got zero and one here which is going to be zero.

And then we got one and one which is just going to be one. And we're gonna do that entire computation for our kernel over our input.

And then that's going to be placed here in our output.

All right. Then we are going to move one over.

And so now we've moved over here. We're going to do that same computation negative one times.

One here is going to be negative one zero times one is going to be zero one times one is one.

And when we do the sum of all of these now that's going to be zero.

And so we're going to place that here. We're going to continue kind of moving across.

And I'll just show you so you can kind of see and then we'll move down.

So now we've moved down. We're going to move across here.

And then we're finally going to move to our last job here.

And each time you're going to be doing the same computation here.

You're just doing that pairwise multiplication and then you're summing it over the entire kernel.

Russians noticing that, uh, when, uh, their windows are moving, uh, you overlap the edges.

What is that? What does that allow doing to process, like overlapping?

Yes. So that is actually a parameter that you're going to get to choose.

So you can decide if you don't want to overlap at all.

If you don't have do what overlapping allows us to do is to especially get very small objects that might be in an image.

So then you're looking at, um, a maybe a basketball arena is your image and you're trying to find the basketball, right?

And so if you are, if you're sliding over it, you're going to be able to capture some of those smaller, um, objects a little bit better.

But these are all parameters you can choose.

So if you're only trying to classify very large things in an image, you might, for efficiency sake, not slide only one over each time.

That's a great question. Yeah.

My um, sorry. And then also for the assessment that we have at the end of this.

Is that, is this are these like the type of questions that people have to answer,

like maybe do something like this by hand, or will it be more like multiple choice?

That's a good idea. Yeah. You guys are giving me lots of ideas for what should be.

So thanks for that, Mike. I was thinking maybe in three dimensions though.

Was more fun, right?

Um, typically I'm not going to have you do convolution by hand, because why in the real world are you ever going to do that by hand?

So typically it's going to be things that are more real world focused than that.

There's also this great convolution visualizer from Edward Yang, who I don't know if I have the full look.

No, I don't have that pulled up. Um, but this one is really good. This is also in canvas.

Um, especially in just a minute. We're going to talk about padding and stride.

And so you can actually test out different types of patty and, um, uh, to your point, Jonas, you can test out,

uh, what this looks like when you do have a stride, uh, where you don't just roll along one by one pixel.

Yeah, like the padding in the stride. Can those be, like, hyperparameters that you do?

So those are things that you're gonna set as part of the architecture. Yeah.

Can you is there a way to, like, set those to maximize or like, minimize your loss function or something?

You have to do that by hand. Sure. It's a good question.

And typically we're going to step out at the architecture level. And so that's not going to be incorporated into your loss function.

It'd be kind of a weird setup to modify your architecture over time.

It'd be pretty, pretty fun and interesting to try it out, but I don't think it would work very well in practice.

And you can also do this in three dimensions.

If you have three dimensional data like videos, which are basically just two dimensional images across time,

um, or you have some kind of volumetric data like medical scans.

Convolution can help extend that further. So now our kernel was going to move across width height and depth.

And also with height and then depth over time.

Um and then this can allow us to capture this pattern in three dimensions,

which is very helpful when we're looking at 3D medical images or doing some kind of video analysis.

So if you're thinking, I want to do some video analysis for my project, 3D convolution may be something that you'll look at maybe.

There's lots of different ways to go about doing with your data. This is just one.

Okay. So what's. So that's convolution as a um concept.

And now we're going to talk about how do we incorporate that back into a neural network then.

And so we're going to add two new layers. So last week you talked about fully connected layers.

It's that kind of basic neural network. This week we're going to add two new layers.

We're going to add a convolutional layer which acts as a filter to learn patterns in the data.

What we've just seen. And then we're going to do pooling layers. We're going to reduce dimensions of the data.

And we'll go back and explain what we're talking about here in just a minute.

All right. So convolutional layers are going to utilize a sliding window containing weights.

So now that kernel filter or kernel is going to hold our weights.

So each one of these is going to be a weight that can be tuned during training.

And then we're going to apply that across our entire input. Each node is then connected to a very limited subset of the nodes in the layer before.

And the filters are going to contain shared weights which define connections between our layers.

So during training then each filter is going to learn to recognize certain patterns in our input.

And so looks like this similar to what we've just seen. So this output then is what we're going to call a feature map.

And so a feature map is we're going to apply a filter those trained weights on top of our input image.

And then we're going to get a feature map which is what's going to get sent then to the next layer in your network.

So this is the output of our convolutions. We're going to call it feature map from a neural network perspective.

This feature map then is the input to that next layer in your network.

So we're going to go across the input image just like this. And we're going to go ahead and fill in that feature map.

And here is a full view. We've got our input here our filter kernel.

We're going to slide that filter kernel across our input image.

And then this is then our resulting feature map which is what gets passed on in that neural network.

And a reminder that this filter or kernel here these weights are going to be learned.

And so these are weights that we're going to learn. We're going to randomly initialized them just like we did at the start of training last week.

And then these are going to be trained with our neural network.

Okay. So in terms of filter size. Filters are going to have a dimension of f times f times d where d is the depth of your input.

Oftentimes in images this is going to be three red channel green channel and blue channel.

And then we're going to have a two by two filter which here in this case is three by three.

And then we have obviously three of these one for red, one for green and one for.

So D is usually going to be three for us.

And then we often are going to use multiple filters for each convolutional layer and output a feature map per filter.

So this is one filter. Uh, we're going to have an output of one feature map.

Uh, for our different filters. Okay.

All right. So this is where we get into some of those parameters that you set when you're building the architecture of your CNN.

So when you're building a convolutional layer, these are things that you get to set.

One of them is stride. So so far our stride has been one.

We've been moving over one at a time. You don't have to set it to be one.

That's very common, but we can move it by more than one position at a time.

This increases your computational efficiency and essentially is going to

downsample your image so that you have less information that you're looking over.

Now the number of rows and columns traversed per move. Then that is what is called the stride.

So here you can see we move to two over. So our stride here is two.

And you can see what this does to your outputs where we have a stride at one here our output is three by three here or strides two.

And our output becomes two by two.

So we end up with a smaller amount of numbers to then pass on to our neural network, thus increasing the computational efficiency.

Questions in stride. All right.

Another parameter that we get to set is called padding. So if we use our standard sliding filter approach, as you might have noticed,

pixels in the middle of the image are going to get seen a lot more frequently than those at the edges.

And so if we expect that some of the things we may be looking for are at the edges of our image, then this could be potentially problematic.

And here's just a visualization of the number of times each pixel is covered when we go over it by a three by three filter.

So you can see in the middle here it sees that filter nine times.

We're on the corners here. It's only going to see it four times.

And so to minimize information loss from our edge pixels, we can add extra filler pixels around the edges.

So here's our original input image. And then we just add zeros around that image basically giving it some padding.

There's no information here. This padding provides no additional information.

It just allows our filter to go over more of our actual image.

And then if the resulting feature map is the same size as our original image, we're going to call this a sane convolution.

So feature map here. 12345 by five.

Our feature map here five by five.

So if we had enough padding here that our feature map is the same size as original input image, then that convolution is same,

because the amount of numbers you're putting in to your layer and the amount of numbers you're getting out of your layer are the same.

We're really creative. Bunch with our naming, aren't we? Okay, so let's think about how we actually go about calculating our feature map size.

And this is where things can start to come together here. So we've got our input here.

And we've got our filter here in green. And then we have our resulting feature map here.

Now how we actually calculate this is this equation here where we the number of output dimensions

is going to be equal to the original width or height of our image here minus the filter size,

plus two times the padding all divided by stride and then plus one.

A lot of people forget that plus one. Um so we're going to add one.

And so here are output dimensions. We have a five by five.

So it's going to be five here. And then we've got a three by three filter there in green.

That's going to be minus three plus zero because we have no padding here from this image.

And then we're going to divide that by our stride which I didn't tell you but it's one here.

And then we're going to add one. And this is going to give us three. So our resulting feature map should be three by three which it it.

So this is our resulting feature map that we've been looking at. Okay.

So when we think about dimensions for a convolutional layers. So filter size this is typically uh we're going to use odd numbers.

This is something we get to set. So we get to set the filter size.

Uh typically we're gonna use odd numbers. Uh, this allows us to preserve spatial dimensionality.

So think three, five, seven a larger number of smaller filters.

So like multiple many three by three filters is usually preferred to a smaller number of large filters.

So that we can basically learn more complex image features because it's spread across more filters.

These dried, we're generally going to use a stride of one.

In certain situations you may use something different here,

especially if you're really going for computational efficiency and you really understand your domain well.

And then for. A common practice is to set p equal to f minus one divided by two times.

So filter size minus one divided by two. So the output feature maps are going to have the same dimensions as the inputs.

So input is going to be the same amount of numbers going into our layer as that output of our layer.

But you. Why do other numbers, um, preserve social dimension?

Yeah. So it has to do with, um, a variety of aspects of how pixel, how pixel space exists within an image.

So. That is struggling, similar to the learning rate and gradient descent like that.

You don't want it to be too big or too small because that could maybe like skip important features or patterns, or is that not really the case?

That's not necessarily the case here. Um, stride is one of those parameters that, um, can be played around with.

And depending on your application, a different stride may be appropriate.

Um, for most applications, we use a stride of one.

Um, but that doesn't mean that all applications are going to need a stride of one.

Um, that's different than the learning rate, which is something that is part of the training process itself rather than the architecture,

which is what we're focused on here in this slide. So these are all things that you get to set when you are building a layer in your neural network.

Yeah. Danny, is there a reason that you want, uh, output feature maps of the same dimensions as the inputs?

Yeah, it's a good question. It's usually helpful from a like, complexity perspective and a computation perspective.

Um, helps with convergence. But I as a practice, a lot of the neural networks I built do not follow this best practice.

Yeah, I really like doing valid padding, which is no padding.

Uh, rather than saying padding. I think padding can.

It adds it adds some complexity to your network.

And I think the downsampling downsampling aspect of padding is usually fine.

That is to say, if I was doing an application where it's really important to make sure that the edges were captured very well,

then I would use, um, a this type of padding.

Yeah. We've only seen a square sort of situation where we used to.

Yeah, absolutely. So yeah, you can do this across any number of dimensions.

So your filter size is always going to be like three by 3 or 5 by five.

That will always be square. But we will definitely have input images that will be of different sizes.

Yeah it's a great question for your change or attenuating the output.

Um, yeah. So then that would that computation would change.

Exactly. Yeah. Good question. Okay, so now you can see where instead of having that giant fully connected layer.

Now when we have these multiple filters, um, we have a lot less weights to learn.

And because we're sliding it across the entire image. And so we're still seeing all those pixels, but they're not all connected to a neuron.

Are we in our fully connected layer. Back propagation is going to be the exact same as we talked about last week.

So it's going to be the same thing, except instead of multiplication we're just going to be doing the convolution operation.

So everything else is going to work exactly the same where we have um, our convolution is going to have that input and that filter we get an output.

We're going to do the same thing with backpropagation. And then through all through gradient descent and so on.

From a training perspective,

training a convolutional neural network is exactly the same as training your fully connected layer just with convolution instead of multiplication.

So it makes it look a little bit crazier.

Uh, when we have these like multiple dimensions going on.

But it's the same calculations. Okay.

So the other layer that we're going to introduce. Don't worry this one's an easy one.

This is our pooling layer.

Um so typically when we have an image our neighboring pixels are usually going to be very, uh, highly correlated with one another.

Right. If you have if you take a pixel, if you take a look at all the pixels on the screen,

this pixel is pretty close to this pixel, and this pixel is pretty close to this pixel.

And so you can really expect that neighboring pixels are going to be highly correlated with one another.

So pooling layers allow us to downsample our feature maps and then to reduce the number of features that we have,

um, as we, um, calculate things in our neural network.

And so how this works is basically we take a sliding window.

This is typically going to be two by two. And then we're going to slide it across the input.

And we're going to take either the maximum or the mean value within each window region.

So for example here we have um a feature map.

And we have uh 1156.

And we're going to go ahead and do a max pooling of this. Um, and so the maximum value here is six.

And so we're going to put a six here similar here. Our maximum value in green here is eight.

Maximum value here is going to be three. And our maximum value here is going to be four.

And so max with two by two filter illustrated two.

So here here here here is going to produce an output of this where we basically compress the information content from this feature map into this.

But it gives us a majority of the information that we're going to be able to pass on in our neural network.

So this is basically just down sampling yet to be fixed as to whether you take the max rating.

Yeah, it's a great question. So you can do either max pooling or min pooling.

And it really depends on your specific domain and application.

Most of the time what you're going to see is a max pooling layer. Um, but on occasion you'll see architectures that have a mean pooling layer.

And that is just a function of trying different things out and seeing what works best for your application.

As with a lot of things in this past, I wish I could just give you, like, a formula sheet.

Uh, do this when you have this instance, do this when you have this instance.

But unfortunately for most things you are looking at,

it's going to be based on your data set and it's going to be based on your loss function decision,

and it's going to be based on your architecture, the rest of your architecture that you're designing.

There's so many different factors, the evaluation that you're expecting to do and like what you care about in the evaluation.

So there's so many factors when making these decisions. It's a massive optimization problem that is really tricky.

Um, and so you're never going to fully solve that optimization problem.

Unfortunately,

I conclusion that anybody who works with neural networks frequently comes to realize is that you're never going to fully optimize your neural network.

Your neural network is never going to be the perfect neural network for your end application.

But is it better than the other one you tried? And that's kind of where we're we're going with this.

So why do we have pooling layers? Well, it reduces computational complexity because it decreases the number of dimensions we have.

Um, it gives us this property of spatial invariance. So the network becomes less sensitive to exact positions of features.

So in that basketball example the basketball is always near the hoop.

And you haven't done any kind of pooling.

Then the network is going to learn that the basketball's only.

So whatever it's in the middle of the floor the network may get more confused.

This also helps prevent overfitting. It is in itself a form of virtualization.

When you do this pooling layer, and then it helps us maintain the most prominent features and discards the less important information.

So this is where you know you're bringing those most prominent features forward when you're doing a max pooling,

versus if you're doing a meaningful and you're just finding the average.

Okay, so when we think about how to calculate the feature map size.

Um, when we're talking about a, uh, max pooling layer, we are going to use the exact same equation that we have here.

So we've got our output dimensions. Um, we have a feature map here that is 4x4.

So four. Um, we have a max pooling with a two by two filter here.

So that's going to be two. We don't have any padding here. Then we're going to bind by a stride of two.

So we always do a stride of two for those max pooling layers.

And then we're going to add one. And our output dimension is two by two which it is.

So our resulting feature map here then is two by two.

And so what? We build a convolutional neural network. So we've got our convolutional layers here and outputs these feature maps.

We do a pooling layer here that our feature maps turn into half the size.

We do another convolutional layer here. Get other feature maps.

Do another pooling layer. It gets smaller.

And then what we usually do at the end of a convolutional neural network is then we put in a final fully connected layer.

And that is what our classifier is. So our input features are the feature maps from our previous convolution and pooling layers.

And basically this is doing all of your feature engineering through doing all your feature engineering here.

And then you can put a model here. Usually we do a layer that is a fully connected layer.

But you could do anything here. You can take the features you get out of this process and you can put that into a decision tree.

A decision tree would take a really long time to run, but you could do it right.

And so basically we're doing a bunch of feature extraction here.

And then that fully connected layer is what is actually going to produce the classification for us to feed our data in.

You have to flatten the feature maps into an array.

So we're going to take right because we have this these feature maps that are two by two and then by x.

And so we're going to flatten those out.

And so they're in this really long array and that really long arrays and are going to get fed into our fully connected layer.

Now the number of outputs here of course then response in a classification problem to the number of classes that we have.

Um in our problem. Okay, this is our first ten minute break, so feel free to get up and move about the cabin.

Yeah, exactly. Oh, this is so cool.

Okay, here we go.

Yeah, it was a great night. Okay, so I'll just keep an eye on.

My tired patterns and then sit down.

So I think that is likely to.

Happen. Yeah. I wanted to leave this to you.

And I kind of have a tendency towards.

Because I know it has to be right for you, you know?

Yeah, yeah. Is that right? Well, I didn't make it very late.

Yeah. It was, it was like. Oh, my.

God, it. Was great.

Yeah. I can give you access to also, you know, a lot more.

Oh yeah. Oh wait. That's right.

Why am I saying yes? Oh, yes. She told me to set up.

Yeah. Wait. If I were talking about I have.

A doctor friend. He had to go in this year.

Yeah. You know, you got to start with.

I thought we had to take an elective here. Wait, listen.

So I'm like, oh, I'm sorry. No, I was actually just about, you know, so because I was in, uh, to have some help with the advertising for it,

especially because you have to have hackathons and stuff on campus.

So. Yeah. Do you mind if I send you a blurb and you have revealed that?

Yeah. And if you missed that.

Yes. Absolutely. Yeah. Have you registered for the conference yet?

Oh, okay. I'm about to recover. Oh, okay.

Yeah. So if you register for the conference, then you can sign up to volunteer through the registration form.

Oh, okay. I would do more than that with you.

Yeah, let's let's definitely set up a meeting. Um, I know my week is a little crazy right now, but let me.

I will send you that email. And in that email, I kind of, um, give you some times that might work.

Okay. I can yeah, yeah,

because I have to get all the volunteers to organize this week and then send it out because we actually have over 50 said just in two hours.

Yes. No worries. Six and easy. And then February 7th. Okay.

Gotcha. Yes. You need to. Yes. You know.

So thank you for that. I know it's great.

I did, you know, I actually was thinking about.

Yeah, you can tell us too much because John.

But Wednesday it was a bit too busy today. But.

I have I have so many questions. Okay. Um, so just okay.

Great news about everything, but, like, where would you like to start with.

So where are we starting at features over traditional number models?

Or was it once God wants you to call the thing, it's like, I think the meeting is great because we're smiling and gross.

Um, you know the thing, it's like it's, um, so it's looking at like, for example, like, I don't.

Know, what about all those little things like that?

But, like, if we're looking for, like, you know, your specialty, do, like,

within a height of an image and then we're looking at like three by three of each that are the.

So what's the these are just red green and blue.

Uh, right. And and um, so we use slide and just like when you slide, you know, I did not actually I kind of I think so like when you're sliding,

it's like did you get to it like, you know, this is all the red values right.

So these are going to be red. How much red is in that pixel. And then you're going to have another part of this that is here.

That is the green. Another one is blue. And you're going to have filters for the red one.

There's not even one. So I guess I got kind of confused on like what we're what and why we're why we're

reducing it when we're like we're representing because I know that like there's.

You split it up just by the red, green, blue. And then you reduce it.

But like when you like.

Why are we, like, going to, like, reduce the, you know, like 2 or 2 drivers in it and like, produce it like, how do we.

Because I guess like I'm just confused on the systems.

So and honestly like I have so many like thing is I feel like I was overthinking it too much because like during it I was thinking like,

how do you train? Like how do you like like how do you how do you teach it?

What like a line is if you can only or like, what do you mean? Cat is you're only looking at like a small portion of like the picture because I mean,

you know, if you see fur that doesn't automatically cat, you know what I mean?

So like, okay, I'm so, so so here we have an input image.

Right. And our input image has these three layers.

So it's 228 by 220 820 pixels to generate pixels.

Now we have a red one and we have a body. So we have 228 times 228 okay.

So once we do it then uh, you know, so this is 51,984 numbers in this square, right?

Yeah. And then we have 550 1904 number is this where 81,984 numbers.

And this was 28 by 28. Right. So 51,908 for another number is 51,984 51,009.

Okay. So if we put this into a neural network and this is a fully connected neural network.

So let's say we have ten neurons in our neural network.

56789 ten right.

So we're going to put ten neurons in our network.

Yeah. It has to. It's looking at every single right gradient.

Exactly like that part I understood. It's it's putting up like the red,

green and blue pixels and also splitting up the splitting it up so that even just one thing alone is not fully connected.

It's, it's it's just it's like looking at a chunk of it, like reducing like I guess it's sort confuse but it's not.

It's it is reducing. It's not reducing the number of things just starting with this.

It's reducing the number of things like you end up with at the end.

So as you're moving through your network then. Right. So this is our fully connected layer.

And so for now we can have, you know, just an enormous amount of weights because we've got uh,

ah, if we have all ten of those neurons in each one of those are connected.

So we have over a million weight. So you could think like this is going ten different ways, and then this is going ten different ways.

Suddenly it gets really massive and crazy because you got a million of these weights that are just connected to that first layer.

Yeah. And so what we can do instead is have um, instead of having every single pixel here connected to this neuron,

we have a filter of this neuron which is just this big old thing.

And then this filter just goes across everything in red.

And then we've got another filter for everything that goes across it green and another filter that goes across.

So it is reducing. Then like the number of things you like the number of neurons.

So like you're starting out with then. Yeah exactly. So number one, number two rounds with the number of weights.

Yeah the number of weights is one. So there's still ten neurons right. Yeah.

Yeah yeah.

Oh that makes a yeah I think I got confused because I was thinking that like it was still starting with the same like like producing it down,

but now it's starting with a fully reduced thing.

Um, only like when you look at, like a picture, it's not connecting every other red pixel here.

The green and blue pixel is only connected to like the other red pixels just around it.

Yes, exactly. And so now, instead of every single pixel being connected to this image and having their own weight,

now we have this filter slides across and you're only learning the weights for that.

But it's seen every single year since you never saw the red.

Yeah, but just not at the same time. Not at the same time. Exactly.

So that makes sense, because now I know it's not like we're reducing it down.

But then how is it? How does it still training?

Maybe maybe we'll get to that. But it's like. I mean, if you if you're just trying to like, learn what it cat is like.

So they're all separate. So how does it come together to learn what a cat is at the end?

It's only learning like a three by three grid. That's that's a great question.

So now what you have is you have a combination of these which is like your feature map.

Right. So you're going to bring all these features and these are going to be put together into your feature map here.

And then this feature map goes on to the next layer. And this feature map might work something like really simple right.

Like a curve. And this one right learns like a squiggle.

Right. And so and then you pass it on to your next layer and it's going to learn other things.

And so the whole combination of all of this together is going to learn all of these different

pieces of information that come together to be then the classification of a dog versus a body.

So, so I see so like the so like the feature maps like this like feature map is like Western represented after learning stuff

and then like that's kind of like what the layer is like representing before move on to the next layer of learning more.

Yeah. Exactly. So okay. So yeah. So it's going to learn like all of these like basic features in the first layer, two layers in the next feature.

And the more layers you have, the more of the higher features it's going to learn so much more sense to okay.

So this is a lot right? This is a lot of information. Sometimes I call it the classes.

It's much whole challenge where there's a lot of information like this.

Yeah. That makes that makes so much more sense. So. Okay good. Thank you.

Yeah. Of course we'll just get like a software update and to implement.

This class and reinforce and. Capstone is actually going to be easy to write.

It's a seven. What do you it would be. Yeah.

We do. Sorry. How does it feel? Like every class is going to be hard.

So. Sounds good. You know, I do need to show our turnout.

Oh, yeah. The students transferring data. So here I am.

Yeah. It's just like, kind of the background itself.

And you know what they require. Oh, I did this time.

I know, but it's, you know, it's a pro, right?

I know, so I was like okay the 12 can in the can.

Yeah. It's kind of like a magic show as humanitarians.

Yeah I hope you guys like I like.

Oh my gosh, you should all be present. I think the best like the diet version of the.

If you like it. Oh, really? You know, you'll have a diet on your resume.

Yeah. That's right. That's awesome. I never heard of that.

If you have like is different. I think that that is low key.

Like I wonder with your intro with the zero one is better. You say that you ahead.

And just like I like to get a return of the white, the white label I think that's that's more.

Yeah, yeah that's a that that is better. Like that's like I think like like filtering this like like it's not legal.

I'm like I'm like I got a problem with myself.

It's like you have like a CSV, I don't I might die just like that.

Maybe the challenge is to solve it because I mean, that's, I know valid.

Like I would be happy to do that but also that just that. But if that's the case, then that's just like bad design science is not like that's how I.

Okay, well, yeah, we'll come back together because you have to have a person for this kind of students.

To like I'm not going to push back. Against.

His students and then you. Oh, yeah.

Okay. So as a point of clarification around.

Why we're doing this. So if we have our original input image here.

Okay. So we've got we said this was a small image.

Right. It's 228 pixels by 220 pixels, which means that there are 51,984 pixels in this one image.

Yes, 228 by 228. It's around 51 to 52,000.

Okay, so we've got 5050 2000 little dots here, and we've got 51,984 numbers that represent red for that image,

and then 51,000 numbers that represent green for that image,

and 51,000 numbers that represent blue for that image were each pixel for each of these pixels has a red value, a green value, and a blue value.

Now, in our traditional most other perceptron fully connected layer that we talked about last week,

we would have a neural network with, let's say, ten neurons.

We've got ten neurons here in our first layer, and then the one up there that I can barely reach.

That one is your bias, right? Which is why it has a one. Okay.

So you've got all of your neurons. And then when we talked about the fully connected layer, right.

And we had our input, we said, okay, so um each input is going to be connected.

This one is your input. It's going to be connected by a weight. We talked about that last week.

Right. So input connected to a weight to our neuron.

And then it's got that like activation function and then it passes that forward.

So the challenge with images is that we have all of these numbers that are representing our pixels in our image.

So instead of just one weight being here, we would have 51,984 lines each with their own weight coming just from the red channel.

And then from the green channel, we would have 51,984 lines coming to this neuron.

They're all representing that green channel.

And for the blue channel you could probably see that this is going over 51,000 number lines coming from the blue to here.

So I mean you're talking about I mean lines that it would take me all class period to draw.

Right. This would be just this giant mess where each one of these has its own weight such that for this, if we did this not just for this round,

but for all ten neurons in this layer and neurons isn't that much rate for all ten neurons here,

it would be over 1 million little lines where each of those lines has a weight.

And so that weight is a number that has to be trained by our network,

which is why it's rather intractable to do it that way, because there's so many numbers.

So what we do with convolutions is we keep the ten neurons here.

We're still ten neurons. But now instead of all of those lines, there's 51,000 lines from each of those.

Now all we do is we're going to learn. Little filters.

So now we're going to learn three filters for each of these. So we're going to learn a red filter a green filter and a blue filter.

And so this red filter is a three by three. And so we're just learning three by three weights.

So that's all our network has to learn. And that slides over this image.

So it sees every pixel in there. But we don't have to have a weight for every pixel.

It's just going to pick up important information there.

And in this first layer that important information is going to be something like a curve or like a line, right?

It's going to be super simple. What this stuff is learning in that first layer.

And then these are going to come together and be concatenated together into our feature maps.

And the feature map then is the output here.

So that's the Z that we had before. So instead of just one number now we have this feature map that we pass up.

But now look at what we've done here is we've taken a million of these weights.

And we transformed it down to only be 28, 280, 27, 270, plus ten for a bias into the layer.

So now what we've done is we condensed our network significantly and now we have more layers.

And each of these layers adds more complexity. And we learn more complex things in our filters.

But we don't have to learn all of those different lines connecting it, all of those weights.

All we have to learn are these little filters.

And those filters just slide across our image, looking at every pixel and pulling out important information that is within that particular filter.

So we're going to learn about lines and curves. And then later on we'll get to a more advanced stuff.

We'll learn what a dog looks like or what a chicken foot looks like.

We're down here in our neural network, but if we had a fully connected network, we wouldn't even get past the first layer.

Maybe too much. And so throughout this process we're going to and we're going to downsample things.

So we're going to make this even smaller right. So we're going to have smaller feature maps.

And then we're going to get all the way to this array. And this array is going to be pretty small.

This array is going to be on the order of hundreds of numbers instead of millions of numbers.

And that's what's going to be put into our fully connected layer.

Then we're just going to have whatever, let's say ten neurons, but now there's hundreds of inputs instead of a million that we're going to learn here.

In order to classify something as a dog or a bear.

Does this make more sense? I would like the motivation of why we're doing all this stuff.

Okay, so here is what a picture looks like.

Uh, basically what I just showed. Okay, so we've got our dog here.

224 by 2024 by three. And now we have a convolutional block.

And so within our problem we show what we're going to have a convolutional layer which is going to do that filtering.

We're going to do some batch normalization. Remember we learned about that last week for some regularization.

And then we're going to have our ReLU activation function. Um and so this is going to be our convolutional block.

And we can do this any number n times. So we can have multiple of these convolutional layers.

And then we're going to do a max pooling between each of these convolutional layers.

So we're going to do a convolutional layer which will have BatchNorm an array with activation.

Now we're going to do our max pooling. And then we're going to repeat that process for n times.

So for the first time the output here is going to be 224 by two and 24 by 64.

And so we've expanded upon this. And then our max pooling is going to reduce this down to 112 by 112 by 64.

And we're gonna repeat this a number of times. Now if we didn't repeat it at all here.

Um, and we just did one convolutional layer, which we wouldn't do because we weren't learning that much.

But if we just did one convolutional layer, we would flatness and it would just be 112 by one, 12 by 64, which would be pretty large,

but not quite as large as having a fully connected network all the way through, we'll have our fully connected layer.

We'll have a softmax activation function as part of that fully connected layer.

And then we'll have some kind of classification here, reducing that number down to just four numbers, whether it's a dog, cat, very bird.

And in this case we have a number that is pointing to that is a dog versus a cat, bear or bird.

So this is what the architecture will look like when you're putting this into PyTorch or TensorFlow.

These questions. I think a lot of us are okay.

So I think this one's really fun because you can actually visualize, um, the feature maps inside of this.

And so, uh, what this is, is this is an m, this classifier.

So I'm going to draw a number here. And then we're going to see the feature maps for each of the layers of our very simple CNN.

So let's look at six.

All right. So I can look at so six. That's my input.

Uh and then you can see here are my feature maps.

And you remember feature maps here have filters in between here.

And your feature map are a result of the filter over top of your input image.

And so we've got our feature maps here that still, you know, kind of give the look of a six.

Um, and then here you're going to see that's downsample.

So that's our max pooling layer here in high that we're show it.

And then here is my second convolution layer. And so you're going to see that uh what we see here is just kind of some random sloppiness.

We can't really understand it as humans. And then we'll do another downsampling layer here which basically just makes that smaller.

And then we're going to have two fully connected layers in this network.

So here is one of our fully connected layers. And then here is the other fully connected layer.

So here you can see where each of these nodes in this layer got its information from.

And that's what the lines are. This one is pretty fun to mess with because you can.

You can do all kinds of like edge case testing.

So here we have a two but it classifies it as one.

Or you can do something. Which we all get, but it thinks, is it 3 or 6?

And the interesting thing about a CNN is that you can actually look at the feature maps and determine what makes a feature map light up.

And so you can put in input images, and you can see what parts of a layer are lit up by different parts of your input.

Um, feature images. And you can actually create images of what are a feature maps like what it is activated by the most.

And so here are different images. And so you can see these are all square images, all from PG 19,

layer 14 and all different types of features that are highly activated by that particular neuron.

So here you can see some curves. These are all mostly curve detecting neurons.

And so you can see curves in different orientations.

But you can also see in some dots there it looks kind of like faces the beginning of faces which is pretty fun.

So earlier in your layer, you're going to, um, get mostly like lines and things that look like this.

Later on you're going to get start to get some textures.

And you can see here you're going to start to get patterns a little bit later in your network.

And as your network goes on to learn more complex things.

And so here you can see things are starting to come together. So we're starting to see this one is probably a dog um, a dog detector.

This one here looks like some kind of bug detector. We've got probably some I've some kind of building there.

And so you can start to get much more complex with your with your visualizations.

And this is from Google Meet. Net, which we're going to talk about in just a couple of minutes.

Okay, so first up is why Ends? Um, so we've talked a little bit about why CNN is because of their computational efficiency.

But also um, one thing is it's translation and variance.

So if we wanted to identify a basketball in all of these images, we want to recognize a basketball no matter where it is.

And we don't want to be distracted by other objects in the image.

Neurons in a convolutional layer are connected only to nearby neurons in from the previous layer,

so it's not connected to all of the neurons like in fully connected layers.

It's just for locally.

So it represents a narrow range of features in smaller patches of the image, uh, which are very useful when we expect information to be more local,

like we do in images, where it's not the entire image that's an image of a basketball.

There are basketballers amidst a bunch of other stuff, so there's a whole lot to not be affected by objects elsewhere in the image,

especially because we have that filter process where we're moving it through the entire image.

And because we use the same weights for patches across the image, right,

that filter across the image, it gives us that translation invariance that we're looking for.

So regardless of where that basketball is in our image. Our network is going to be able to find it because it's looking across the entire image.

And it's not just focused on, um, particular pixels.

So let's take a look at a few popular CNN architectures.

And we're going to talk about, um, some today that are, uh, primarily used for image classification purposes.

And then the next lecture that we have together in two weeks, we're going to go into, uh,

more advanced CNN architectures, especially around, uh, things like object detection and segmentation.

All right. We that this is the first successful CNN application in the late 90s by John McCune at all.

And what they did was they, uh, were trying to solve a problem for, um, postal offices and that post offices somebody used to, back in the 90s,

had to read every single address every time, like a person was reading that and then sorting the mail, which is crazy to think about, right?

Like a mail sorting center, you have an army of people there that are sorting mail.

Oh, um, so they were trying to create an automated way to do this.

Um, and so they have an input. This is a super simple, uh, CNN so you've got an input.

It's just a 32 by 32 input. They've got, um, some feature.

So they've got some convolutions here. Um, subsampling.

So some, um, max pooling there. They've got convolutions here downsampling their max pooling there.

And then they have two fully connected layers. Um, and then they have an output layer and.

And so this is really, really a simple neural network, but it actually works pretty well.

So here you can see um, this is from Yahoo Kids website.

It calls it demo and weirdos.

Um and so here you can see, uh, this is the prediction up here, by the way, that you see the question mark and, you know, pass it through.

And then we get an answer of what that is from later. I like this one.

Which are the weirdos. So these are is A2A3 and eight.

And these were actual numbers that were um, from like male.

And so they got a huge collection of data and synthesis like actually have some people.

Right. 832. That's crazy.

Anybody right there? I don't like this. But pretty impressive that such a simple neural network was able to to capture,

uh, enough information from those to be able to identify these these weirdos.

So nobody thought that, um, CNNs were super useful.

Um, so the CNN architecture comes out. Uh, Yann LeCun and his team, um, of folks who is a, you know, a graduate student at the time.

Yeah. Look who he was able to come up with this, you know, semi useful application.

Um, but most people were not super convinced people were still using SVMs for image, um, image classification.

Uh, and then, um, in the early 2000, um, there was a young professor at Stanford, uh, Feifei Li, who came up with a concept and she thought,

well, we really what we really need is to be able to see the world, and we don't have enough data.

So Yann LeCun had a very limited data set that he was using in a very constrained problem.

But the idea there, you know, now it's AGI there. It was like, you know,

like kind of general intelligence for like images like how can we build like the best system to be able to identify anything in an image.

And this was kind of a crazy idea at that time that nobody could figure out,

because they were all still using SVMs and doing, you know, this handcrafted feature engineering.

That's why we have so many features for traditional amount,

because people spend entire PhDs working on this stuff of trying to figure out how do we build a system that can see the world as humans do.

And so it's very similar to AGI, just, you know, thinking back 20 to 25 years ago now.

Well, anyway, Feifei Li was really interested in doing this problem.

She had done some research, um, when she was a student in neuroscience and like AIS, um, and was very interested in solving this problem.

But she took a different approach than most people, and she decided to create a very large dataset.

And so she spent, um, many years and, um, almost her lab almost went bankrupt,

putting together ImageNet and ImageNet with a bunch of images scraped from the internet.

And then they paid people on Amazon Turk to go in and label all of these images and label what was in all of the images.

And so what came out of this was a very large, very clean data set that classified all kinds of things, everything from dogs to pots and pans.

It was the first general data set of images that we had.

And um, so ImageNet came out with not much fanfare and nobody really used it.

Nobody really cared about the dataset. Um, so brilliantly we thought, well, we're going to make it a competition.

And, um, she, she must have been in some of my classes, and I really like competition.

Uh, so she that said, okay, we're going to make this a competition and we're going to, uh,

have this competition run, uh, and see what can get the highest scored image out and then get prizes.

And so, um, the image competition was born.

And before long, um, people were submitting all kinds of different architectures, all kinds of different SVM architectures.

And, um, I, I've read her her autobiography and it goes that, um,

she got a call one day from her graduate student that had been working on this project, and he called.

It was like, well, somebody just beat ImageNet by a lot.

And she was like, well, you know what? If they used a bit, use what kind of SVM did they use?

And he was like, no, they used a neural network. He used a convolutional neural network.

And she couldn't believe it. And, um, nobody could really believe it at the time.

But it turned out that all you need to give is convolutional neural networks with lots and lots of labeled data.

And then they were actually pretty good. So 2012 AlexNet was that neural network, uh,

won the ImageNet uh challenge in 20 2012 by a wide margin and really popularize the use of CNNs in computer vision 2012,

which might sound like a long time ago to you and folks in this room, but it's actually not that long ago.

Great. In the whole scheme of things, 2012, I mean, that's crazy.

Um, AlexNet so it was similar to Loonette as you can see.

But it was deeper and actually wider. So they included multiple convolutional layers prior to pooling.

And then they had multiple uh so they have multiple different um convolutional layers.

And then they apply a max pooling. But you can see it's still relatively simple right.

Um so we've got uh some different stride. So here you see stride of four.

Um, instead uh, stride of four, we got some max pooling layers in here, a couple of convolutions,

max pooling, and then a couple of fully connected layers here, um, until we get to our output.

So also relatively simple, but did really well. Then in 2014, VGG net comes out.

Um. It was actually a runner up to ImageNet in 2014.

And what it did is it used many smaller filters, so three by three rather than fewer and larger filters.

So previously they've been using larger filters and thinking okay, well larger filters.

That's going to give us more information. Right. Because it's more weights to learn.

What they actually found is that they use many smaller filters rather than fewer larger filters.

That was actually improved results by a good bit.

So, um, basically what they have here is you can see our image and what we're doing is we're doing convolution,

uh, plus reboot that's here in the box. We've got a couple layers here.

And then we're doing maxpooling and red double convolution layers, max pooling, uh, convolution layers, max pooling.

And so this one you can start to see it gets a little bit deeper. Right.

So we're starting to get more layers than the previous architectures.

And that use of many small features was actually, uh, a huge improvement.

And they came up with a bunch of different versions of this.

So you can see here we've got um, 11 weight layers, 13 weight layers, 16 weight layers, 19 weight layers.

We have all kinds of different, um, architecture types within here.

And so these are all in different configurations. We've got the A configuration a, b, c, d, e okay.

We can come up with new name. So they just called it VGG.

Net a you know doing. And then here, you know, this is 2014 and people are like, well, bigger must equal better, right?

We went from Lanette to vagina. We're getting larger.

Things are getting better. So bigger must equal better.

But what actually happened in actuality is we didn't actually see that in practice.

So we've got AlexNet down here with an accuracy rate of around 78% on image.

And then we've got VGG net here, which is going to be around 90%.

And they're like, if we just keep making this bigger, we're gonna have 100% accuracy.

But what actually happens is as the number of convolutional layers gets larger, accuracy starts to decrease.

So at greater than 20 convolutional layers, traditional CNNs show significant degradation due to optimization difficulties.

And here it's happening on both the training and the test set.

So it's not overfitting. So we can't just add regularization and hope that that solves the problem.

This is actually something called accuracy saturation. And it occurs because deeper networks are harder to optimize weights for.

So kind of makes sense right. You have more layers here.

You have backpropagation has to go many more steps. Your weight start didn't come harder to optimize.

And so here what you can see is error as a percentage. So we want lower error.

And so here we have a 20 layer traditional CNN.

And here is a 56 layer. So it actually gets worse or the error gets higher.

Now, for those of you in the crowd who might be a more theoretical thinker,

you may be saying, well, shouldn't a deeper network be at least as good as a shallower one?

Because it could just simply learn to make these extra layers at the end?

Behave like identity functions, right? It just passes the information through unchanged effectively.

You know, whoever went to a shallower network. Like this.

This makes sense. But actually it's a little bit more tricky than that,

because teaching multiple layers to behave like identity functions is a really challenging optimization problem.

So each layer in your neural network applies a non-linear transformation.

Right. We learned about that last week. So to create an identity mapping these nonlinear components need to precisely cancel each other out.

Basically trying to balance a lot of different complex mathematical equations.

Just to get back to our starting point. And then the optimization landscape becomes increasingly complex with depth.

So finding the right combination of ways to create an identity mapping across many different layers is just extremely challenging.

There's so many local optima. The optimizer can get stuck.

It's actually really tricky to do this. So what are we to do?

Just give up. We're never going to solve this problem.

Well, then we introduce ResNet. ResNet is a really cool architecture because it uses skip connections between layers.

So we basically pipe in the information before these layers to the information here.

And what this does is allows us to, uh, enable those later layers to easily replicate an identity function and set their weights to zero,

essentially just skipping this layer because it already has the information from here.

And so instead of having to pass that information through. It already has that information there.

So we can just set these to identity functions if it doesn't need it. And so what this also does, which is really cool,

is it's going to Preconditioner network as having this identity mapping where everything just gets passed through.

And so because we're preconditioner it's a reasonable starting point.

Um, and the network only needs to learn the residual.

So it only needs to learn the difference from your identity function instead of having to learn everything from scratch.

We start with the identity function, and then we just learn the changes from that identity function.

Better because of a couple of things. One, better gradient flow.

So in deep networks the vanishing gradient can occur, which is what we talked about last week.

Skip connections provide a sort of high way for the gradients to form directly backwards.

So even very deep layers can get strong gradient signals during training and allows us to have adaptive layers.

So rather than a network being forced to use every single layer, the network can learn which transformations are actually needed.

So earlier in training, some of the layers might get skipped.

And then as the training progresses, these layers gradually turn on to learn more complex features.

So Danny was talking about earlier of having this like adaptive architecture, right?

And so technically that's what ResNet allows. It's kind of this adaptive architecture that as training progresses, different layers can turn off.

So you start with the same architecture, but over time you're able to turn on layers that you need.

And it worked. So here is remember that original CNN. We've got a 20 layer 56 layers worse.

Well now we have our 20 layer and then we have 110 layer.

And things are getting better. So here are our error rates on the ImageNet validation set we already saw.

Uh pkg net. Uh we're going to talk about inception in a minute.

And then we have our ResNet networks here. And so this is uh 34 our ResNet 50 ResNet 101 and 152.

So now we've added a lot of layers here. And you can see that our, um, error is getting lower.

And then this is what the architecture of our ResNet network looks like.

You can see here is our 34 layer residual network as compared to a 34 layer plain network based on the residuals.

So you can see all of those residual connections there.

Um, and that allows the model as it's trained to be able to turn on and off layers essentially.

And so they did this with ResNet 18 and 34.

So I think they're up to 34 layers. And then they also just expanded it more and added more layers 5100, 152.

And they were able to add larger skip connections and skip multiple layers if they so chose.

Another network of this time was inception, and inception thought you don't actually have to choose one convolution size for each layer.

And that was kind of the advancement here. So the inception module performs multiple convolution operations in parallel and captivates the results.

So a typical inception model includes a one by one convolution a three by three convolution, a five by five convolution, and max pooling.

Because why choose a filter size when you can choose all of them?

That's what inception thought. And so here is the idea behind inception.

We've got our input here. And this is all within one layer right.

So we've got a lot of stuff going on here. All right. So we come down here we got some one by one convolutions here.

This is act going to act as kind of a bottleneck. It's going to allow us to reduce computations right.

A lot of stuff is coming in and we're going to basically reduce that.

We've got a one by one comp over here which is going to learn a linear combination of features at each spatial location.

So think basically of feature pooling across channels. And then of course we've got our max pooling over here.

And max pooling is going to select the strongest activation in each pooling window making the features more robust to spatial translation.

We've got our five by five convolution here, which is going to capture some of those larger spatial patterns complex shapes and patterns.

And then we've got our three by three convolutions that are going to capture some of those more local spatial patterns and features.

Think, you know you've got a little filter going over your image. You've got a big filter going over your image.

And it's capturing different amounts of information, some more local, some little bit larger and more global.

And it works pretty well. So um, where we said VGG net was second, um, inception was first ImageNet 2014 uh competition.

And what was really cool here is it actually used 12 times fewer parameters than AlexNet but was more accurate.

And so here you can see AlexNet down here we've got our VGG 19 here ResNet or here.

And then we got our inception before there. So it's just kind of barely made it out.

Right now. We're going to take another ten minute break. Any questions before that?

All right. Good stretch break. Okay.

When did you have this? You got it.

Yeah. You said that the model. Like when you make it up.

Is that cause you mentioned, like, skip connections? Yeah, but.

Yeah, like like when you make it bigger. I didn't see it before.

It didn't have. Yeah. So that's. What's your connection solved for us?

Oh, yeah. Exactly. So now they keep making bigger and bigger.

Yeah. As long as you add in those residual connections and a lot of the architectures that we're going to talk about next lecture.

Yeah. Have skip connections built in. So that allows them to be able to do these larger networks.

Yeah. Because that's in Transformers too right. Yeah exactly.

Can we talked about Transformers next week. We are not going to talk about Transformers until our NLP module you're going to get.

I know everybody here is like I want to talk about Transformers for some kind of like they're offering it like they're powerful.

But like, you know, I, I couldn't agree more.

So you're building a transformer. I know, I know.

I have a good reason to go. Um, I got a dash phase just for meeting this week.

I'm so happy. Yeah. So, like, welcome. Any time. Thank you.

Yeah, I, I was like, we got to actually. No, I don't think I've never had a.

I've never actually heard I heard this like two times in my class.

Exactly, exactly. I just tell everybody that they just need to come back next year and take the class again, and then we'll get everything.

Yeah, totally. Hopefully they'll fare better than me.

I'll see you tonight. All right. See you. Um, I have a question.

Next year. Yeah. I think you're also helping.

Me? Um, that's a great question. I have not decided yet.

Okay, that would be missing with the lecture.

That's right. I think it'll be like a session. Yeah.

I don't know if I need to get attached to something else for everyone.

Yeah. Um, yeah, we'll probably we might switch up the teams, but I will let you know.

Yeah. Yeah, I'll probably know about next week. Yeah.

Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's what it.

I. That's enough.

I. Just one.

But have you look at. Seriously? Thank you.

Thank. You for inviting me.

Okay. Okay. Thank you. Okay.

I'm not even sure. Think you.

Well, the fact that. You.

Know what that means?

Yeah. So I want you to show it to me.

Yes. Stop that. Did you just call this room?

Yeah, this is a better way of picking up the category.

And make sure you know that when you.

Yeah. That's awesome.

And you just popped in this just now? Yeah. This was actually.

This was. Oh. Did you just start here?

Yeah, I think so, because I used to play were.

One for some comfort. Um, so, yeah, I gave an example to five.

Hundred. Other people.

Oh. You want go back? I.

Okay. All right.

I think this was the initial. Um, prediction.

And I was just telling myself to kind of show that, and we can do it in the background in order to out the calculations.

And I did it before I defeated the film.

So I can kind of create a mental model of how things do.

All right. That's awesome. So I just yeah, I was like, you know, this like, can't just throw it out.

Like, yeah. Yeah. I just kind of like after the prompt or like, put it, you know, uh, yeah.

I mean, like, there's so many interactions because like, you get to the point that like, yeah,

there's no like one from two examples that I remember something that I'd done before and it was kind of,

uh, maybe this is the kind of like you had a code template.

Exactly. They just like, how do you get to the point that I don't know how that begin and,

uh, it in a template from my other productivity like design technique.

Yeah. I think I had a question.

And I want you to imagine. I'm really sorry I yeah, I moved here is company that you can hire like and so yeah.

Yeah. Okay. And I think the whole time, um, I got to have you really talked to you.

Oh. Because, you know, I think we kind of we are focus on that because we only have, like, thing over here.

Uh, and issues related things. Yeah.

Why don't you group and then but similar kind of innovation, you know.

Yeah. So that's that's cool.

So like, if you like a study that starts just like this.

So when they come here do you. Actually you was here last year.

So is it like fingers crossed. No no no no no.

Okay. Okay. Last year was our inaugural distinguished structure.

You should have been here a year earlier in the year.

All right, everyone. So, speaking of lady met, uh, the man who, uh, invented mine at Yale.

McCune. He came here last year and spoke at the conference on Society Center Day, which is happening in only a few weeks.

So, um, if you haven't registered already, I would recommend going and registering because we will be closing it pretty soon.

There's going to be, um, we have over 500 people already registered and so registration will be closing soon, so I recommend registering.

If you are interested in volunteering, you can sign up in the registration form.

I'll be sending out volunteer information later this week.

Uh, last year we had, um, over 700 people, um, come to the event, 50 companies, 20 different universities.

So it was a pretty big event. There was lots of, um, really interesting conversations that came out of it, especially recommend the poster sessions.

Um, so we're gonna have some poster sessions each day. We'll have mocktails and or d'oeuvres.

And if you chat with people, we're working on the cutting edge.

You got people flying in from Europe, um, to come and share some of their research in addition to a bunch of people right here at Duke.

Um, so lots of great stuff. And, um, if we look at our, uh, schedule, um, here, we even have one of our own who is speaking, um, um, Thursday morning.

So you should all go and support her, uh, Thursday morning to register for the conference.

She's going to be sharing some of her interesting research. Um.

All right, so go register for this. Another thing is, in the hackathon, um, our Society Center Day hackathon is happening the weekend before.

Um, so if you want to come out, it'll just be an evening on a Friday.

And then all day on Saturday, uh, we're going to have some really great judges for this one from industry as well as,

uh, we're just announcing a $1,000 prize for the winners of this.

And so I haven't put that on social media yet. You guys are the first ones to know.

So $1,000 prize for the winners of our society's everyday AI hackathon.

Not bad for one day of work.

Uh, last year, our hackathon winners, the hack and the winners also get to present at the conference, which is pretty cool.

Um, so you might be joining Tiffany and being able to speak at the conference, um, on the big stage.

But then also last year, our amazing winners, they went on to we provided additional funds for them.

They continue working on their project, uh,

put out a preprint and then actually got invited to the white House to brief them on AI safety, which was pretty cool.

So lots of cool stuff comes out of this hackathon.

So definitely if you have availability in your schedule, uh, you can, uh, and can make it work.

It'll be really fun. All right, so stepping off of that soapbox and onto my next one, uh, let's talk about some implementation.

Uh, CNN so usually I would say this till after the, um, uh, the conclusion of our next lecture, which gets into more architectural details.

But I do want to talk about this stuff, since it's going to be very pertinent towards your hackathon, uh, next week,

because remember, next week we're going to be here in class, participating in the hackathon with your teams.

All right. So let's talk about some implementation.

So I have an implementation here in TensorFlow. And you will be able to visualize the same stuff in PyTorch if you prefer PyTorch.

So a couple of things here. Um so this is usually using the sequential API.

And mostly just so that I can show you all of this in one view, which is really nice.

So this is a very simple convolutional neural network.

We only have a couple of convolutional layers here. My input shape is really tiny.

So it's only 28 by 28. So 28 pixels by 28 um, by one.

So really, really tiny here. Um, I am going to have my, uh, convolutional, uh, 2D network here and here.

I'm going to be having three by three filters, and I'm going to have ten of those.

So it's going to be the exact same setup that we saw here on the board.

I'm going to have a stride of one. Um, my padding is going to be valid.

And basically valid just means no padding. I'm going to have my ReLU activation here.

And then we're going to do max pooling. We're going to have another convolutional layer here.

This one's going to be a little bit bigger. And then we're going to do another max pooling.

We're going to flatten all of that with a flattened layer. And then we're going to pass it through one uh fully connected layer here.

Okay. And then here, um,

our dense layer is going to be our fully connected layer is going to be outputted as a length of the number of classes that we have.

And so here you can see we have ten classes for this particular classification problem.

And what I really like here is you can kind of visualize what's happening at each point in the network,

and we're going to go through this together now. Maybe.

Oh, there we go. Okay. Um, so here, remember, we got an input a 28 by 28 by one.

Um, and so remember our handy dandy computation over here?

Um, so our initial width is going to be 28.

Um, our filter size. Right. Yep.

Our filter size up here is going to be three. Our padding is zero because we have zero path.

We have that one padding here. And then our stride here is one.

Uh so 28 minus three plus two times zero divided by one stride one plus one is going to be 26.

And so we can see this is the output shape of that first convolutional layer.

It's 26 by 26 by ten. And where do we get the ten from?

We got the ten from here where we decided the architecture was going to have ten.

Okay. Let's go to the next one. So now we've got a max pooling layer.

We're going to use the exact same equation here. But now our input is the output of that previous convolutional layer.

So we've got a 26. Um our filter size is going to be two by two.

So our pooling size is two by two. And then of course our stride again is two padding to zero valid.

So 26 minus two plus two times zero divided by two.

Remember stride is two plus one is going to be 13. And so the output shape of this max pooling layer is then 13 by 13 by ten.

All right. Then we have our next convolutional layer. And so this one we're going to compute our feature map here.

Initially we start out with a 13 by 13 and 13.

We've got our uh filter size of three up here.

Padding again is zero. And our stride again is 113 minus three plus two times zero divided by one plus one is 11.

And so our output shape here then for that convolution layer is going to be 1111 and then 24 to the 20 come from 20 came from here.

So we increase the size of that convolutional layer okay.

So next up we have another max pooling layer.

And so max pooling layer our input is 11. And then again we have the filter size of two the stride of 203 into um our uh calculation.

And we're going to get five five and 20. Lastly, we're going to flatten all of that out.

So we're going to take five times five times 20 and create one single array to go into our fully connected layer.

So now we have an array that is 500 elements long.

We're going to put that into our fully connected layer. And it is going to output one of our ten.

Or it's going to output our ten output classes. All right.

I will pause and see if there's questions. Couple of things here.

We did stochastic gradient descent for our training. Ah learning rate is 0.01.

And we're choosing the sparse categorical cross entropy loss function.

So that doesn't actually matter for any of this because this is just defined in your architecture.

But in case you're curious from a tree perspective and you can see this and build this and run this all in the GitHub.

So reminder that we have a GitHub for the class and lots of code for you to go out and try a bunch of this stuff yourself.

Right questions. So everyone understand where all these numbers came from.

Okay. Danny understands if anyone else understands.

Nobody else in this room. Okay.

Uh, which numbers are confusing here? The ones that are numbers.

Okay. All of the numbers are confusing. All right.

Um, I'm not sure going to help with all of the numbers and confusing.

Do we see how, uh, when we define the different layers of the neural network?

Uh, and we can use this equation to then determine what output shape goes through our network and how our output shape can get smaller,

bigger, depending on those architectural decisions that we make. And we make architectural decisions to expand or, um, condense our model.

And these are all things that this is code that you will write.

So you'll write the code that defines each of these layers.

And you can make these decisions. And you might be saying, well, how do I even know where to start with creating a neural network?

That's where a literature review comes in handy. So based on your domain application, you go to the literature and you say, okay,

what types of architectures have been utilized before for this type of application or this type of data set, or this type of domain?

And then you go from there. Um, and that's typically how you, you'll go about this process.

So a lot of your job, if you are implementing neural networks in practice,

it's going to be a lot of literature review where you're looking at what are the different

architectures that people have found useful for this type of application in the past.

And occasionally you might be working in a domain that is like really unique, and there hasn't been a lot of stuff in that particular domain.

And you might look have to look in adjacent domains. And so domains that are relatively similar to that.

Um, so um, for example, looking at, you know, maybe uh,

you're looking at some kind of sentiment classification and there's lots of data sets out there on sentiment classification and modeling efforts.

But in case there weren't, you might look at surveillance data sets instead of sentiment classification.

See what types of architectures worked well for some kind of facial recognition stuff in the past.

Versions. Yeah. So the original 1026 by 26 by 1010 is the dimensions we we feed it in.

Well, ten are not the dimensions that we feed it in.

Right. Because our input sheet is 28 by 28 by one. So this is like a grayscale image right.

Oh okay. So you have 28 by 28. And then you just have one channel.

That's just how much gray is in that particular pixel. Okay.

For simplicity's sake. So the numbers didn't get too big.

Um, but the ten is just something that we get to decide. So remember how we decided we have ten neurons here?

We just get to decide that. That's why here can be 20 in our second convolutional layer.

But we could just have just essentially said ten. Or you could just as easily say 100, although convergence may be slightly more challenging than 100.

And if you do them, sorry, if you do the math right, it seems like they're preserving.

You're preserving the same number of neurons. Um, or it goes from 26 to 11, I guess.

So are you trying to preserve the same number of neurons for each between layers?

Not necessarily. Um, and this is like a very simple neural network approach, um, for this particular problem here, remember what this problem is.

Let's see what the problem is in GitHub. What we're trying to do here.

Uh, so we're just doing a simple classification of, you know, very small images of different types of clothing and all in grayscale.

And so we don't need anything too complex here.

And when we think about, you know, how many neurons that we need in order to compute this, this is kind of one of those things where,

you know, play around with all that, you know, play around with different architecture types and sizes.

So it wasn't like a necessarily like when I created this, it wasn't like, oh,

this is the perfect optimized, you know, I'm going to do ten and then I'm going to do 20.

I played around with different things and found the one that worked the best with my data set compression for the second maximum,

where you with this move doesn't make a huge difference if move up or down.

Usually we're going to move it down because you can't create something new and you're always going to just go down.

Not idea. Yeah, that's a good question.

Downsampling is easier than interpolation. You get to be 30 divided by to one.

Sorry, there is no identification vaccine. Oh, I'm.

So we use the ReLU activation function here for similar reasons that we used to.

Uh, last, um, last class, uh, is that in hidden layers in order to prevent against, um, uh, the, uh, vanishing gradient,

we're going to use a ReLU activation function, uh, and then at the, um, output here, uh, it's not actually actually define it here.

Um, but at the output it would be a softmax. Great question.

The questions. Okay.

Let's talk about transfer learning. Okay. So this is something you want to be thoughtful about.

Um, for next class or hackathon. So I showed you this slide before a feature visualization.

Right. In the network we learned, like, edges and stuff. And then as we move forward in the network, we're going to learn more complicated things.

So more complex objects that are more tailored to a specific type of classification that we're trying to do.

Uh, fun side fact that my folks from to I already know is that, um, pretty much all large, uh,

neural networks that are image based are all going to learn the exact same features in the earlier layers.

Doesn't matter what it is like, if it's a VGG net or a ResNet or a AlexNet, all of them are going to be learning, uh,

different like edges and curves and those types of simple things in those first, um, layers of your neural network, which is pretty fun.

So when we've been doing this, you know, we're condensing everything into that, um, that MLP, that fully connected layer at the end.

And essentially what we're doing is we're doing a bunch of feature extraction so we can

think about our CNN and our max pooling layers and that whole chunk of the neural network,

like most of our neural network, is just about extracting different features.

And so here's just an example. We have our input pixels here.

You might look at edges in that first layer corners and contours in the next one.

And then start looking at object parts in our third layer here before we output whether this is some a person, a car or an animal.

And so this whole part here, all these convolutional layers or feature extraction.

And then the actual specific tasks that we're doing is up there.

That's the actual classification. So we can do something called feature extraction transfer learning.

We're going to start from a pre-built pre-trained neural network that is trained on some relevant task, like classifying images.

So you will find a bunch of, for example, ResNet models out there that are pre-trained on ImageNet.

So they were already on the box pre-trained for you.

And they can classify differences between like a dog versus a cat versus a pot and pans and all that good stuff.

And what they've done is they've already learned all this stuff, right?

They've already learned all of like the edges and corners and contours.

Somebody has already spent many, many hours training that neural network.

So it's already learned this stuff. And so you already have weights that are, um, tuned to extract those particular features.

And so we can take that and we can basically remove that final fully connected layer.

And you can add your own final layers as a custom head.

So we start generic dataset ImageNet generic model.

Generic tasks. We have a smaller task specific data set.

So let's say you wanted to look at different breeds of dogs right.

Like a Scottish Terrier versus a schnauzer versus a labradoodle.

Right. And so you have a smartass specific data set that your big model doesn't work so well on because it wasn't trained on specific dog breeds,

but it doesn't know what a dog is. So generally has a lot of those features.

And what we'll take is we'll take that pre-trained model. We'll cut off the fully connected layer at the end.

And that is now trainable custom head that we can use those exact same features from that model.

And all we have to train is that little last layer.

We can freeze all the weights previously and just train that last layer on our specific task outputs using our much smaller data set that ImageNet.

And this is a majority of what we do when we are doing some kind of image, especially image classification task.

But across different tasks, usually you're going to be starting with a pre-trained model already, especially for the purposes of this class,

because you are going to want to wait for to get basically what ResNet has already

done for you or Ignat or inception or U-Net or whatever one that you decide to use.

You're going to use the pre-trained portion, and you're just going to train your own custom portion of that.

Because it's a lot more efficient. So here's an example.

We've got ImageNet. We've got a generic model an image net with generic outputs like dog.

Let's say we have a smaller task specific data set some kind of medical imaging data set.

We have a treatable custom head. We freeze all of these weights and then we train it on just specific task output.

So we can do something very specific like classify this as fibrosis.

But we've learned all of those features already using the generic model.

And then we use them on to apply it to the smaller application focused data set.

Essentially using that pre-trained model as a feature extractor, hence feature extraction and transfer learning.

Now, something else you might have heard of is called fine tuning.

And fine tuning is very close, but a little bit different.

So we take a pre-trained model still. So we still take that generic model.

And now we continue training it. So remember how in training we start with randomly initialized weights.

Well, if we started with weights that are already kind of close, we can converge a lot faster.

It's a lot more computationally efficient. So that's exactly what we do. So now we have a smaller learning rate, a new task and data set.

And then we keep training that pre-trained model. So we're going to start with those pre-trained weights.

We're going to update all or some of the model's parameters which you might do especially in image classification task is you might freeze part,

especially those early layers that are just getting edges and curves and stuff.

And then you unfreeze the weights and you keep training the weights of the later layers that are learning more specific features.

So you're going to use a lower learning rate so that you don't destroy all of the useful features already learned.

Um, and then you can train it for much fewer epochs.

And so this is the concept of fine tuning. This may be also something that you decide to do for your project for this class.

Questions on fine tuning or feature extraction.

Transfer learning. Feel comfortable.

You guys can go and do it. Okay, I got more nods there than the number, so I'll take it.

All right, let's talk about data augmentation.

Okay, so we want our model to be able to recognize objects even when they look slightly different than our training data.

Um, and this is, uh, a huge problem in the real world is we usually have very nice,

clean data sets for training, and then they don't generalize well when we go out into the real world.

So similar to my mirror example, right where we had all these nice images of like models in studios and then out in the real world,

people have got like crap all over their house and it's like really hard to do the same types of detections.

What we would ideally want to be able to train our model, to be able to recognize objects even in different situations.

So, for example, things that are farther away when things are darker outside, different locations, sizes,

rotations, brighter and darker, where to give our data or our, um, model more data to be able to do that?

So in order to help our model be more robust, we can apply what we call data augmentation or transforms to our training data.

Very important here. Training data only. So our validation and test sets do not receive data augmentation.

We only do that for the training set because it's technically not.

It's a form of synthetic data. So we don't want to actually test our model on it.

We just want to train our model on it.

Here you can do things like random cropping, rotation, changing the brightness and saturation, all of that good stuff.

So in PyTorch this is how you would do this. You're going to load your image data.

And so in PyTorch we can store images and corresponding labels in a PyTorch dataset and then load them all in in a data loader.

The easiest way to do this is to use the datasets dot image folder method.

And then we can apply a set of transforms on that data as it is loaded into our data set.

So it's literally just one line transform equals transform.

And then we have labels. Uh, now, you may have labels organized in some other method other than this directory structure, which is totally fine.

Uh, you can, um, incorporate and reorganize the files into the image loader file, or you can just write your own data set class.

That is totally fine. However you want to you want to get your images in there.

If you want to write your own data set class, that is pretty easy with AI at this point.

Um, and so you don't have to reorganize everything. Or if you want to follow a nice tutorial and do it exactly how, um, PyTorch has loading structure,

then you're just want to have your directory structure look something like this.

Okay, so in PyTorch, the transforms are going to be applied when you iterate the batches in your data loader during model training.

So it's not going to do your data augmentation, uh, when you load in all your data, because you're not going to be loading in all your data at once.

Um, which is a good thing, you don't want to load all the data onto your machine at once,

because this is going to be a lot of data that you're working with more than likely.

And so what you're going to want to do, or what PyTorch is going to do, is it's going to iterate.

So when a batch comes in from model training, it's going to apply those transforms.

If you're using randomized transforms, each epoch is going to contain different transformed images that.

So they've got all kinds of different transforms that you can try out. Um, they've got like center crop.

They've got, um, all kinds of different like resizing of images.

Um, they've got, um, different types of cropping of images.

They've got, uh, random rotation. So you can rotate your image, you can flip your image around.

Um, you can also change the colors of the image. And you like the color jitter.

So lots of different transforms that you can apply to your images.

It's already built in to, um, the data set loader.

Now, one thing you might notice is that it's not enough. And so that's where you can do a really cool final project.

Um, if you have, um, a type of problem that could really use a really cool data set augmentation technique that you can't find anywhere else.

So, um, for example, there was a young lady a few years back now in this class who did this final project of, um,

a computer vision model like facial recognition in the dark for darker skinned people, which she was not able to find a data set on.

She actually created this entire data set herself, and then built this model using all of this augmented data as she did some synthetic

data in there and some really cool different data augmentation techniques.

And so a lot most of her project was not the modeling itself.

It was actually the curation and development and augmentation of this data, which was pretty cool.

In TensorFlow.

Um, we've got a class called um Image Data Generator, which generates batches of tensor image data with that real time data augmentation.

And so that's this is what that looks like, uh, where you can change, you know, rotation.

You can shift the width and the height. You can do different zooms, horizontal flip, all of that good stuff.

So all the same stuff you can do in Image data generator in TensorFlow depending on which one you prefer.

Okay. Questions about data augmentation. Feel confident you can go forth and do some data augmentation.

Yes. Would you say? No. This is a new question, but do you think PyTorch or TensorFlow is better?

Because I see like you have examples of mixed and like I, we learned a lot of PyTorch last semester.

Now that a lot of TensorFlow. Is TensorFlow just better for computer vision?

No, it totally depends. Um. Uh, yeah.

It's interesting because it kind of depends like where you work, which one you will use.

And so for me, I have worked a lot with Google X.

And so we did a lot more with TensorFlow and then a little bit of Jax towards the end.

Um, so I didn't use PyTorch as much. So when I joined the program and all of John's examples were in PyTorch,

which now now PyTorch is very well known in industry and lots of people use it in industry.

At that time, PyTorch was more of like a research tool because industry has gotten so much more research heavy,

a lot more people use PyTorch, and a lot of PhDs went from research into the field and started producing code with PyTorch.

So PyTorch and TensorFlow are both widely used in industry.

I would see PyTorch probably more so now than TensorFlow at the time of starting this program, or time of coming to this program.

TensorFlow is still widely used, especially in anything that touched Google.

So I was curious. Yeah, I would learn more of the like theoretical underpinnings of things and less about like whether you use TensorFlow or PyTorch,

just use whichever one you know fits your style of coding better, and you're probably going to have to learn the other one at some point.

So maybe do one project in TensorFlow and one in PyTorch so you can nicely compare and contrast them when you get asked in an interview.

But then they'll throw some curve ball at you and be like, well, what do you think about x, y, z?

And you'll be like, I haven't heard of that. Like, this is a new one that I built in my basement.

Ten years of experience acquired it. Yeah. You'd be surprised, um, how many people, like, just build their own system?

Crazy. All right, other questions.

Thoughts? Ideas? Answers. Does anyone have answers?

Performances. Impressions. Alliances. All right, well, I will see you back in here.

Um, next week we're going to be doing our first half of the semester.

It's going to be really fun. We're going to get our hands dirty, learn a lot of stuff.

It'll be great. Any questions about that?

Can we use the hackathon to like, advance our project?

That is the point. You should be using the hackathon to advance your project and like free to use code from the hackathon on the projects.

But I mean, you should be hopefully. Yes.

Okay, that's the whole point of the hackathon, is to give you guys a time to work on something that I think is important to work on,

but then also be able to take that and then directly apply it to your project so you don't start your project a few days before it's due.

At least you'll have this so that when you few days before it's due, you will be like, at least I have some code that is already written.

Okay, so this is what we're going to be doing next week.

Um, we are going to build a quick prototype that uses a pre-trained model as a starting point.

And then you're going to apply some thoughtful augmentation tied to real world variation that your system should handle.

So some kind of data augmentation technique. And then you're going to demonstrate how your decision helps the model generalize.

So by the hackathon. If you haven't started thinking about it yet, I'd probably start thinking about, okay, what do you want to do for your project?

And what do you what do you want the data set to be?

And if you come in with those two things answered, I think the hackathon will go really smoothly for you.

So I think about that with your team member.

What is the problem you're working on, and what is the data set that you're going to be looking at for that?

And then you can come here and do a few experiments. Uh, we're going to do that quick prototype.

You going do some short pitches on it and then you can directly hopefully apply that to your project.

And you'll definitely be able to apply the learnings and a lot of the code to the project.

Even if you choose something where you're like, I don't need to do data augmentation because I have a million image data set and that's great.

Um, but this will be really helpful learning nonetheless.

And you have code that's a good starting point for your pre-trained model at least.

Yeah, maybe some code for visualizations and thinking through the evaluation of your model.

So you'll be able to do that all next week. And let's see.

Yeah. Pretty simple. You're going to have hackathon pitch with your problem statement.

The pre-trained model you used in the transfer learning approach. What data augmentation technique you used in your preliminary results.

So we're not looking at you know, you have the full results of everything.

But just like a quick experiment to try things out, get some code written and get loosened up for the semester.

Or our teams are the ones we're working with on the final project.

On the module project? Yeah, exactly. Yeah.

Is this like, sorry or slides?

No, not at all. So you're welcome to use slides and plug in here.

But you're welcome to just get up and pitch it to. About the data augmentation machine.

That example of to detect a person is not home.

So so can the data augmentation be applied in opposite directions like to make the

existing like the image that is is not clear and just alert it that make it darker.

Yeah, exactly. Yeah. That's exactly what you do in a data augmentation technique.

Questions. All right.

I'll see you later. And the rest? I'll see you next week. The people in the family.

And I think Stuart has office hours today sometime in town.

So. Yeah.

Let's go. Remember last week? Remember last week? I told you I had it?

Yeah. Well, what are we asking?

This is this? Yeah. This is a good idea. Oh, me.

I missed it the first time ever.

I wonder what it has to say. Look at the third in the data.

So, you know, you could have done without the 25 stories.

You know so well. I mean, it's a short anyway.

Yeah. Uh, you know, whatever.

It works, it works.

But it was already like, the actual algorithm is pretty complex because it actually doesn't.

Like. I didn't see that. Okay. And I spent two hours thinking, all right, the algorithms know what we've been up to.

So I was and and so I really, you know, did that 109 or rather you.

Know with no difference between like and you know I think you're right.

But I also it would make sense if I had experience because then you just have to go back.

I don't know if I had to go so I to the big cluster.

Whereas if you sort of think that you're a completely different side of the map and but that doesn't work with your cluster does right around back,

do you know, do what to the point that it's like the starting point of this cluster because like,

there's a lot of considerations that I made, I love it.

I think this is going to be good most of us spent on you remember, like you've learned so much.

Oh it's yeah, I probably should, but it's too long to see algorithm mix on you.

You know, you should learn something about you, right? I don't know what it is.

So I know we should be able to publish this, but what we showed me.

Or we can start this with a story about what we do.

Yeah. You know what? This will be noted. Working. Yeah.

I mean, I'm not scared, but fairly the whole time I go to, you know, this afternoon.

But then I will write, I mean, you know, 45 I mean, once I can get 4605 got my, uh, you know, website on it.

So I'm gonna get in there cause, you know, it would be so massive, I. Made this, uh, you know, Ariel, I'm sure you know, it's, I gather.

These are yours. So we package the database.

Oh, I might want to get this. Would you go see what it's like for you guys?

I don't think I mean, if I got lower than a 45 000 47.

Oh, yeah. I think I was like, oh, that's right.

Said she had to tell she was walking.

No, it's not that. Oh no you're right.

Oh no. Oh my God. Oh my God.

I don't know. Oh. Relax.

Forget about the lay of the land. The source code. Oh, yeah.

So that's how I was able to get this. But I don't know math like you do.

And keep it in like her mom, like. My dad's a symbol.

I know that's what kind of meant to my family. Oh. Family ties.

Oh. Really?

So you. And you actually know what is with that?

Oh, I feel like that makes it so much fun.

But it is what it does to you. Yeah.

Um, I think I got it to spice.

Well, maybe at the end of the picture. Yeah.

Maybe you never thought it was a homicide. It looks like graduation.

Uh oh. I just never thought it was. Yeah. There's a criminal. He's black.

I don't think that we have a question about, uh, for computer vision.

Oh, yeah? So we have three different ideas. Okay.

Wow. Okay. Three ideas. Currently. Currently. Okay, so one is, um, so focused and checking, like, looking at books, like.

Okay. Nice one is that the other one is, uh. This, uh.

So just like a natural, satisfying survivors. And then I said ideal could weaken cause I would scream like I used to, like on my feet.

And snow would still perform. Well, there's no right. So we couldn't find any data sets.

That was basically a disaster. But this is one accumulated data set.

So just finding okay, but what we want to let you know that we want to augment this with like snow.

Why would that be something that. Yeah that's a good thing.

Yeah I like it. Yeah.

You just have to think about from an infrared perspective, what would snow look like recently and find a different data set that is like a snow.

So just so you know, like how it would affect your images, um, that's what I'd recommend doing.

What was our third idea? I forget it, the back. Oh yeah.

The emotions of pets are those, like, just basic, kind of like the cat and the yoga.

I don't think you found a good dataset for that pet.

The hardest one is. Yeah, it would be a dataset around pet emotion.

Yeah. We don't even know that option.

Yeah that's true but the was to has a lot of.

Yeah. So what does this sound like?

It does? Yeah. Sounds great with that. Um, what do you see this morning without the competition?

Oh. Like horror? I don't think so.

No, because you're basically just updated at the data set level until you're augmenting the data that would be going in.

So, I mean, it'll be like, it'll be a fun and interesting problem.

Um, but I don't think it's going to be terribly computationally complex to make those modifications, especially because you like this.

These are. So they all really do have like, uh, variations of different ones.

Nice. Yeah. That's great. Yeah. So just kind of keep going off of this and then trying to find a snow data set,

an infrared data set with snow and like looking at this would be interesting.

Some of the changes of the data. But there's snow is present.

Yeah. But it'll probably obviously look pretty similar to that cloudy scenario.

Okay. Would you I guess I'll the it. Yes.

Yes. Thank you so much. Yes. Okay. I think we could add a lot more.

I just have another idea.

What if we did items that was, like across the maps of the world, and it could find the best pleats and one vice wanted to come over and install it.

Um, I think that you and I will be on. In, like, impoverished areas.

And then that negatively affects, uh, I guess cyber security go running at lower rates.

Um, but I don't know, how do you guys. So I do not want to get into it.

Like, we have to, you know, I like research.

I think one thing is, like, it needs to have, like, a water source.

I don't think this goes by, but I'm sure what we can ask about it.

I know the other talented leaders like now.

Basically they do not like to visit us, but most of them wrote all year round.

But what would you say someone like that was talking about the ones that are there to availability?

Like what would be like the most environment? Are you two really or at most 82 hours a day?

No, we actually just keep them out there. Oh, wow.

You guys are just. Factory over there so that we're thinking like, because we're datacenters now,

they're down here on top of the place where we were all like, what is the meaning of it's there for us?

And they're not thinking about like, the neighborhoods and the people near the city.

Yeah. So we somehow I think I heard it this morning.

Oh, you had it all. Oh, it's just I mean, it's like I would have to be okay.

If you have any questions, you ask me. Oh, yeah. Oh. Doctors away.

Yeah, yeah. Yeah, yeah.

I'm just like. I kind of like that.

And especially, I just do like everything I like to try. I have you actually need to sit on that, you know.

Okay. We should get started soon as possible. But it's okay if you haven't said because I haven't.

I mean it just once. I'd have time to start it. Yeah. You actually just go check and see what exactly.

Yes. So you would not know everything.

But I think I'll leave that alone as well.

Yeah. Whatever you like. I like it says up to us.

Yeah, yeah. I want you to know we just have a place of worship. Yeah.

Okay. Uh, listen, uh, I'm not gonna do this again like I do, depending on the task I do, because I have a lot.

I have, like, many different tasks. So depending on how extensive like this set up, like we got, I'm interested in that.

They'll be like, what causes your laptop? I think we have all these things that I wish I would have dropped the exact data center,

but just oh, I especially when you fly over, it doesn't matter.

Uh, I'll make you just put it out there, you know, the way thing or something actually has like.

Yeah. As you're flying. So that's, like a problem for me.

Uh, I'm not sure you can search my mind.

Just make sure you're like me. You have a virtual.

Machine, and then you have to be totally killed by that.

Yeah, yeah, I know exactly.

And let's see. Oh, and got my period.

Okay. Yeah, that makes sense. If there's, like, not a lot of trees there or something, I don't know.

Yeah, exactly. Oh, okay. I'm gonna tell the group before I forget it.

I don't want to go so fast, so I'll. Okay.

You ready for that? Yeah. Uh, just search up online, because depending on what your task is, different virtual apartments are better for it.

Oh, computational. Yeah, yeah. Let's say like, the data centers, like a mile.

But if you use the word for your your use for this, I might as a matter because it's virtual of where we could hypothetically like somewhere else.

Because I think it will be a slightly different. It's like I think you have some unique though.

You you should use what you've been using for the past few years.

Uh, I was like, you know, I've always been using, you know, whatever you been using last year.

But when we get into it. So not because they don't care about.

Why am I not getting this like I was five year old, so you don't.

Oh, maybe on the first. Earlier I was like, you know, this will be more for my, my my stage of that.

So I don't know. Yeah, I support you right now because I have to clean up the tape. Um, yeah.

So right now milestone was this one this week I'm pretty busy with the baby.

Yeah. No. Yeah. What do you mean, like, another option for that was a question like.

Yeah. Like. Oh, there is no.

But it seems that will be. Oh yeah.

I don't think if I haven't checked out much data set up to you. Okay. So I'll get my apartments first today I think tomorrow.

Okay. I'm going to start when I read everything.

I don't think it will affect switching objects okay. Yeah. I don't think our projects, the fact that one person doesn't finish it with another person.

Yeah, yeah, yeah. Um, just. Yeah. Yeah, I don't know. Yes.

But if you're curious, you have you have a meeting where you can ask for data team work or something.

Yes, yes, yes, yes. Uh, and also everything on the drive so you can see it.

Everything's in a drive with the same driver. Windows open so you can see.

Oh, yeah. Okay. So for me, like, doesn't affect me.

Oh yeah. We might see the northern lights tonight. Oh really.

Oh my God I've always wanted to see the northern lights on each night. I thought it was yesterday.

Oh nice. How did I not know that you're. No. No. Yeah.

11 lights. Yes. In Durham. Or would we have to follow me when the road is, like, on the edge?

So it's like part of it. So I didn't have any. Where would you go do.

Yeah, I think there's Pete.

Yeah. Healing windows often linking park on. Just basically normal computer vision on the northern leg.

Go. Any idea? Go on. It'll probably be just like.

Yeah. The last time I was in North Carolina, I fell asleep. And then we woke me up and I was really mad.

No. Yeah, yeah, we were here.

I think for the last month. We were. Dominic went to see it.

No, I missed it because I was asleep. Yeah. I'm not of like I know for sure I was asleep.

I missed it also when you said earlier you missed somebody recognizing certain things.

So you you shouldn't be sleeping. That was good. Right?

See you guys later. Bye. This is where you sleep?

It is more like. This is what she said. She likes it.

Oh. She said uh. So when did you know?

When I. When it was like they did that project where they had a drone and then they could measure,

like how big a whale was in the water, like for like, no, do that.

Like used drones or like images of that drones already have like measure an area.

So like, let's say data centers like a mile by half a mile wide.

Then we could like, use that to measure a piece of land to see where a hypothetical data center could go.

Right? Yeah. I was like, it's like you have a job and it's, you know, you've you actually have a drone.

Yeah, I make over I remember we like, just talk about me. Like I was like, oh, I might be going to Vancouver for spring break.

Oh skiing. Oh wait, why did cougars I don't know, my parents said that's good stuff.

Oh, yeah. What's your thing? Whistler. Yeah. Whistler. Yeah. That's where we have to fly to.

Data. Yeah. And if you're. That would be awesome.

I'm going to ask you for tips because I think we're like one night so you'll know like good place to eat.

They still and they have like, you know my hair before I actually taste that.

That's also one. The Fairmont is open to all.

I'm sure you have a hot tub. So I got your ski and you got a hot tub and a sauna in it.

So the next thing you obviously know, you can go skiing again next day.

What's your thing? I have a thing. I'll see if it's best for your wife.

I was just this past weekend. That's what it was. That was also pretty straightforward.

I come to check on stuff and also excuse their bumping into children on the ski.

Oh, yeah. I took a very hard fall. I broke a pole. Oh my gosh.

I knew you could break a fork. Because of you.

Yeah. He was like, okay, next to me. He's like that's he's like, you want it like that?

So I'm like, oh my goodness, it doesn't work for me. You know, so I get to meet up after 50 would be good.

Um, after 8:00. Sure, I'll probably take it for sure, but.

I mean, I mean, yeah, that's right. Cool. We're getting somewhere safe.

You know, and I have a meeting with my manager group. Hey, I was so tired.

Like, I actually tapped out last week.

It was so bad. I'm so confused on what to study like from these sites, but for the assessment we have.

That's what we have in assess like yeah test. When is that?

To walk. Um. You say? What is that?

It's a team member of the at the end of the block or the end of the block, and I'm not.

And I feel I feel okay. I feel like I've been I've been looking at this stuff for a while.

Yeah. Me too. But the thing is, like, I don't want to spend any time outside of Boston.

Yeah. I said, I just want to stick around.

So I just do. I think the image segmentation is like very interesting.

I've noticed that the way I've done it.

You have these, um. There's one more.

So I thought, you know that.

You know, I started the. I haven't been able to do anything, but I'm so happy, you know?

What I mean. So for this boss, we have our assessment for his work.

It's what you're supposed to do. My model.

Which I know was a big one. He was here. People with you trying to get you to be okay?

Yeah. I think so.

And.

I think all of us are. Yeah.

Because like when you're the youngest obviously added the demos and I'll think that I have to like when I finally see you in college now,

like I was to copy that I'm not going to be confident on.

Although I think that it was scary because.

Line. I said, I'll call you.

Right. You know my.

Duties here. When you work. Your way back.

I'm just. Yeah, yeah.

I would. I like to see. Yeah.

Be honest. Yeah. So you are obviously there.

And. You could show us that as well.

So, you know, I've come to you for coffee, everyone.

Not everything matches and we're to there.

Yeah, you. That. Let me.

Thank you. Thank you. Well, this is.

Is that all you got? But, you know it's not gonna be the same.

No. It's not. Kavanaugh.

Comments. If you look at all the. You know.

Who? I'm was the $5.

You. Know?

Oh, I can see. I know, I get it. Uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh uh.

But. Um.

You know, I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah.

There's no, you know. Yeah, we're just doing.

I just don't know if he's me.

I love him. Yeah. What's up? Um.

Some things to do. Say. Yeah.

Yeah. They said I should write a LinkedIn post on our, uh, on on the honor code reinforcement learning lab.

So I did that. I'm doing that. Yeah. Yeah. Are you writing it up or have you already?

I'm writing. Yeah. Okay, I'm going to share the story. I'm going to share it.

Oh, well, thank you so much. What have you been doing?

And what do you talk about in terms of your piece of that?

Yeah. That's it. Yeah. Yeah. But like.

I said I'm really just like. Like the world's like.

Yeah. Like. Yeah. What?

I'm just like. I like to be honest.

Exactly like you. Yeah. I do, but yeah.

Yeah.

