[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
This is one of the ones that the other one.

I. Don't have that exact, but I to have fun., I guess we have a certain.

The reason I noticed that is because it feels I'm always going to.

Be up front here in the front, fighting the back, and everybody thinks things are good.

It's nice to be a little bit closer...

It's. Not.

No, I don't think.

I got lost 126, 36., I did, but I. That's. It's 126 as., we're going to do an exercise., try to do it on your phone if it doesn't work.

Oh, that's. True.. Not that. Not that we were using.

It. But it wasn't there., let's get started.

Good morning everybody., I understand folks are a little bit tired this morning., everybody. Pretty straightforward., good.

Good., I will publish the solutions later today, they'll be available on canvas.

And as a reminder, our second deadline for assignment one will be next week.

 once I hand out the solutions, you have a chance to compare yours against the solutions., if you need to correct anything in yours based on seeing the solutions.

Go ahead and do that and then resubmit,, before starting class next week.., if we came up with a solution. But it's somewhat different from yours as long as it's.

And pass the test. Yes, you do that., I would not.

 the tests that are included in your notebook are not comprehensive.,, just because something passes the test doesn't necessarily mean it's., you can score a wrong answer, potentially, and pass the tests.,. I wouldn't rely only on the tests., there are sometimes different ways to solve things and even potentially different answers for things.

And you can still receive credit for it., sometimes there's,, it's deterministic and there's one answer that you need to get to.

Other times there is a range of different answers,

and as long as you provide something that is logical and you use to find your answer, that is totally fine as a solution.

Usually it's going to be pretty clear from looking at the solution if there's opportunity for different types of answers,

but it's pretty obvious,, versus if there's one answer., but, use your best judgment., it can be fine if you don't exactly match the answer.,, sometimes, let's take a couple examples I don't remember what's on assignment one,

but sometimes I ask you to give, give me an example of a situation when you might use something.. That's obviously a case where there's going to be a lot different answers.

 of course you don't have to match., the answer that's on the solution.

And probably the solution won't even have an answer.,, because it's an open ended question., sometimes there will be, I know, on assignment two,,

there's a math question where you're asked to derive something, and there are multiple ways to get to the answer.

And I think in the solution, I provide two different ways to get there.

But you may come up with a different yet another way. It's entirely possible there are other ways to get there.,, as long as you get to the place and you believe your answer is correct and you can justify it, then,, it should be., make sure to resubmit with any corrections to your work., by,, if I start class next week.

And if there are no corrections, that's great., then just resubmit what you just mentally.. Let's chance any questions. And then I say.., first of all, I wanted to,, commend everybody for,, a great seminar on Friday., thank you all for being on time for,,,, being seated, ready to go at the start of the seminar.

I didn't see any laptops out throughout it, which was great., clearly the message got across,, the laptops., and thank you for the good questions., both during the seminar and afterwards as a group of folks,, around and,, talking to them, which is great., speakers love that.

They love when there's questions that means that,, the people they're talking to actually care about what they're saying.

If there's no questions, you get, you get the feeling you don't really care and you're just talking and nobody's really paying attention.,, that was great. And I know Mandy had a great time., thanks for that. And,, let's keep that up.

They may not all be as interesting to you as,, as maybe last week was, but,, please do still give them your full attention and try to ask questions.

And even if it's not a topic or an industry that maybe is particularly interesting to you,, at a minimum you'll learn something.

It's a good opportunity to learn something new, and might as take advantage of it.,, thanks for that., this week, our speaker is,, I know Charla, who's a friend of mine.

He was a successful entrepreneur over here in the area., you can look him up, but he saw that a company, the social media archiving show, it's called Archive Social.

And he saw a few years ago after working on it for,, ten years or., and,, I spent a minute to give you a little bit of background because I'm not sure how much background [INAUDIBLE] give you., but he,, when I first met him, he was an engineer, I think, at IBM.

And,, really,, some of you came to the conclusion that he didn't really want to work a normal job,

and he wanted to be his own boss and do his own thing.

And he quit,, and he said, I don't really have a specific idea yet of what I want to do.

I just know I want to start that company and do something., and he,, he left, and he his first thing that he started on was called Tweety Mail.

You can ask him about that., probably one of the only one of very few people actually remembers that,,

and this was when Twitter first came out and it was a way to interact with Twitter through email.

 instead of having that, log in on the web and post or read your feet,

you could just,, you could just send an email and add a tweet., and, he tried this and had people using it.

And a lot of projects that we started it didn't really get that much traction., and he decided it wasn't really a great company to start., but the social media space at that time was really the hot area.

And he decided he wanted to do something else in that area. And eventually he found this niche of,, social media archiving.,, here in the US, there are laws that require all, government,,

agencies and government officials to keep an archive of all their public communications,, that later on people can go look things up if they want to.

And that also applies to anything that's put out on social media.

You have to you have to keep it a public record of it., and his company just did that.

They helped city,, state, federal government agencies,, just keep a keep an archive of all their social media interactions.

 they were compliant with the laws,, and had really good success doing that., and,,.

And he, he went from,, a guy who was all of us to a very stereotypical engineer,,

didn't really know anything about business,, just was a really good programmer and,, eventually grew up a, a decent sized company.

And he, he was the CEO, he for it was pretty much out of programing and,,

was running a company and,, had to learn a lot of it just from experience and doing that., it'd be great opportunity to talk to him about his,, experience with that and any lessons that he's learned along the way., whether he likes programing or likes running a company better.,,. All the, all these things.,, that should be a great session on Friday..

 today we're going to,. We're gonna pick up where we left off last week, or my first for the discussion on metrics.

And we're going to move into our first algorithms today.

And we're gonna start with the simplest ones that form the basis for most of the other things we do, which is linear regression., and we're gonna try to move through it fairly quickly because we're a little bit behind where I was hoping to be now, but that's., before we get into that, we're going to do something today that some of you have,, maybe already seen in your email, but we're going to start our,.

Was. We're gonna do our first,.

When I call., now, I should check today.,.

I talked about this.., you can wait just a minute before you file this., I talked about this in the first class.

One of my concerns,, with this class over the last year or two has been that,,,

it's hard for me to know whether you're really following along and understanding with the things that,, the things that we do.

Because when you do the homework, you have access to your notes and the and they're in the ads and on.

And you probably can get by,.

With just that., even without understanding everything in the lecture.

 what I decided to do is set up a little system that,, I call the knowledge check.

 we're going to do these on a weekly basis., and it's going to ask you a few questions about what we learned last time.,,, it's all based on last lecture., and it's done in a chat bot style.

But rather than you asking the chat bot questions, it's going to ask you questions and you're going to answer them.

And then the chat bots are going to evaluate how you answered them and try to try to provide some useful feedback.,, a couple of things about this. First of all, this is a test run of it.

 let's see. I tried it last night. It worked for me., I can't guarantee it's not going to fall apart when you all try it now.,, this is this is experiment.

 I did this,, two years ago, and I built a system that did this,, and it worked pretty.

And I decided to recreate it yesterday, and,,, I decided to try to vibe code my way to it., and I built this actually in about 30 minutes yesterday., with help from cursor., I'm very happy with how it's turned out, but there's still a lot of room for improvement.,, you'll see the very first version of this today.

We'll get a chance to try it out., I'm gonna try to improve it week over a week, it's a little bit better., starting with by next week, we'll have a real domain. It's not going to be a bunch of random numbers and letters you have to type in., that'll make it a little bit easier to get to., but for now, this is, this is what we've got.

 I put it up last night on Google Cloud.,, there's going to be five questions, I think,, that you'll go through,, as far as grading.

 it's going to give you an A grade A score, which is a zero.

The three score on each of the questions,, as far as grading for this class purposes,, we're just going to grade these as effectively pass fail.,, you need to get above a 50% roughly to consider passing the knowledge check., if you complete this and it shows you your score is 67% don't have a panic attack because you think you failed., anything above a 50% in my book is,,, is considered,, decent.,, good. Pretty good., don't don't get hung up on,, what your numeric score is when you take this., one of the hardest things to do when you try to apply a large model for a purpose this is to try to figure out how,

how picky you want it to be on things., and that's been a constant challenge with,, trying to do this is,

I can, depending on how I said it, it could be really nit picky.

 if you missed,, one little detail of something, it's going to mark it wrong.

Or you can go to the other end of the spectrum where it's, as long as you're even, remotely close.,, I give you credit. trying to hone in on that sweet spot is hard for an LLM.

It's also hard for human. sometimes too., again don't get hung up on the score.

Let's just try to pass these meaning,, shoot for above a 50%,, and total on it., you're, you're,, as far as the contribution of these things to your grade, there's going to be two things.

 this is going to be our mechanism for taking attendance. we'll do this at the start of the class each week.

 you have credit just for, just for,, starting the quiz., and then the other half credit comes for, for actually getting a 50% off on the quiz.. it's pretty simple. And hopefully everybody will be above a 50% on average on this.

This is closed book. No, it's. No either that. No., chat gpt., nothing in here. I fully realize this is,, it's incredibly easy to cheat on these things by just asking me to give me an answer.

That you guys are doing these on your own. This is really more for you than it is for me.

I know,,, it's useful for me to see if there's problems where people aren't understanding certain things.

I have, a dashboard I created for myself where I can see how everybody's doing.

 if there's a particular question and don't, nobody's getting it, I can see that which is useful for me.

 I can help you., but really, it's more for you just to see., and the way the questions are designed or,,,

 roughly to mimic the types of things you might expect to see in an interview.,,, when you start your interviews for machine learning engineer roles,

it's entirely possible you'll be asked questions this.

 this is also a great preparation, I think, for you for, for doing interviewing.

All.., for the questions that it does ask us on the, on this quiz., is that something we can reference later on,, because you said,

if these are interview questions that maybe we can use in an interview later on., sure... I don't think I put in an export functionality yet, but that's a good addition., I can add a little export thing if you want you can just,, save it off., you won't be able to get back in. I set it up to be,, as simple as possible, meaning that you,, there's no,,

if I create an account or anything,, in this,, you're just going to follow that link.

It's going to prompt you to put your name and put your first and last name, just in case.,, and I'll probably keep it that way just to prevent having to have you all,, remember passwords or manage an account., but,, maybe I'll add, an export button or something.

 if you want to save off the,, the questions and the answers,, you can do that.,. When after you answer a question,, there will be a little bit of a lag, but,, review your answer and then it'll show you a few things.

 one, to show you,, your set of points,, 0 to 3 on that question to,, try to give you some feedback on your answer.

 if you, missed it point or if you stated something that is incorrect,, it will try to provide you a few sentences of feedback., on, on,, what about your answer might not be.

And then three at the bottom,, it'll show you what's called a what we call a model answer.

 that would be a,, an answer that maybe I would come up with, for example, as a model correct answer.,, hopefully the feedback is useful in your answer.

And if you don't get something, take a read through the model answer., just to see how maybe I would,, solve it., a little bit of background on the tool., the way the tool works is,, I have a,, an instructor for the whole thing, which you see when you go to this of the constraints...

 I have a, I have an instructor for though,.

And I can create. I can create,, quizzes from it,, by just uploading,, lecture slides., I have an account, and then I can go and I can upload my lecture slides.

It parses the text., it identifies the key topics we've talked about, and then it comes up with,,,

questions on each of those topics, along with a model answer that's based on my lecture slides.

 the benefit of doing that is,, the questions and the answers are consistent with my lecture slides.

 if I were to just go to GT or something and say, come up with a bunch of questions on,,,, bias, variance,

trade off or something, I will probably do that, but it might not frame things the way that I present them in class.

And I want it to be consistent with how I,, with how I communicate things, things to you.,,, I have it build it off of my own lecture slides and then,,

it comes up with a set of questions and model answers that I review and adjust and then publish to you,, and then,, and then you can go and take them.

 why don't we let's give this a try., this is the link.

 first of all, you go to this link, and I realize this is long., if you don't feel typing this all., I sent this by email,, a few minutes ago, you should have it in your email, the link to it.

You just click on that link in your email. It's a canvas announcement., and that should take you to the,, to the start of the quiz.

 you put your name in your head, start or whatever the button is called.

And,, and then I'll take you question by question through the quiz.

 let's give it,,,, we asked you for about 15 minutes,

 to check to make sure everybody's more or less done at about 15 minutes, just to double check.

It's,, is a one shot question answer. Or you can talk through the question.

It's,, currently a one shot question. Answer.., exactly.,. We'll debrief after we do this and see your thoughts and any, any ideas.

You have to make it more, more useful..

To me. He said you're not you're not saying yes we can click that link.. There you go. And enter your name there and then just hit the start quiz.

It's once again the thunderbolt again. And.

I. Years.

Because I'm wondering.. You're not time. This is just approximate...

You want to be. I.

Do not. My.. But... All. You have.

This type of agreement. That.

I was. Up for, I think.

Was. Students.

Yes, exactly.. It's.

As. Soon as we see the results.

Yes. There is somebody else on... For instance.

Because he lost. Interest in geology.

 you got 200, 300 and. 26 people below the third pinkie.

Let's see if this. But it's not.. I will say also, this question, I just on off.

I don't know what the nonprofit. Thinks.. You're. That's exactly.

Yes. Yes. The good I really got. Yes.

Museum in the spectrum.

Thanks for that.. it's missing.,, it's out of,. Scored.

Because Mr. Jenkins. Jenkins. Is not an inspiration.

All, we'll get a couple more minutes. Finish up. See all.

Got into it.,, but the,, the telescope is missing one of your questions,.

Yes. You have a 1015. Choose your name., exactly. Some people think it's a little bit too picky., I think. All, let's take one more minute.. If you're not done yet., keep. Keep going while we're talking for a minute.

A little bit picky on your answers. You might think it's very straight down the answers.. first of all, some of this some of you may not have caught this yet,

but the,, the total points shown at the end when you complete the quiz is off., it looks it's maybe missing one of the questions., some of you are seeing, a 53%, for example, that's,,, that's not correct.

 if you want to get your actual percentage tally up your points out of 50.

Based on my numbers, I think it's,, ticked off five points., no. Question five...,. Question. But I think, I know, I think because I manually added that question.

 I think it didn't make it into its scoring system. I have to check on that.

But there's, there.. There's a bug., I think that's I think that's.

It's not including the fifth question in the scoring. don't don't pay a whole lot of attention to the final score.,, this is a practice run. I know you're get you'll get credit whether you, whether you hit 50% or not.

 don't don't panic if you got something below a 50%, even if you manually add up your score.

If you can manually do your score, how many people below you folks are below.. All.. That's., I think it looks based on reviewing a couple of the answers, it was maybe a bit tricky.

It is possible. I was getting I got a perfect score when I took it last night.

But I did get three threes on several of them.,, but I think it's maybe a little bit too hard to get that perfect three out of three.,, maybe what I'll do is,, expand the spectrum of scoring a little bit.,, instead of a zero, one, two, three, it's maybe,, 0 to 5,,

or even a zero the ten or something that to give it a little bit more space to,, to make decisions.

 generally speaking, even though I've, I've tried to tune the yellow,, not to be overly picky.

The problem is,, if you're forced to decide whether it's a three out of three or a two out of three,

it's it's very rarely using the three out of three,

even if there's a little minor thing that's maybe not stated or maybe incorrect, it'll default to the two out of three.

And not that it's not really giving you the three on three very often., I'll work on tuning that a little bit maybe for next week., I'll fix the,, the bug with the scoring you can get a more accurate score., I'm actually.

I think it's always good, he said, giving a checklist of what you didn't, didn't.

Here's the things that you got and here's the things you didn't get for each, actually.

Then even a score just the checklist of. When you didn't.... I'm sorry.

Because I remember one time professor who said he was too specific of a word here, and then defined that in the next question., you need to use more specific words.

And,, I was, I don't know what I'm supposed to be aiming for accuracy of these questions.

Sure thing. Did he and did the when you read the feedback and the model answer didn't make sense.

What it was trying to point out other than that for some of them.. And then some of them and just felt it was trying to find a reason to justify two out of three., that's just how.. Subjective. You're saying.

Everybody else.. I'm also a little confused on one of mine.

I got a one out of three. And then in my feedback it was saying that you said this with explaining bias.

And then in the model answer, it says almost exactly what I said.

 it's confused what you're saying...

 you feel the feedback wasn't accurate that you got or one of the part of the feedback for the I don't know what it was.. They were contradicting the model. Answers should be correct. But maybe the feedback is,, not correct.,. maybe moving to more of a,, a checklist for each question of here's the,

here's the things that we're looking for in your answer.

Here's the ones you, you got and here's the ones you missed or something that, as opposed to just,, free text feedback that might make it perform better because even with one of my.

It's again a technicality on the last question of the of the,, outcomes versus the salvage.

And because it's,, I said I gotta specifically say to a word accuracy, precision or recall.

It's, I don't know, in any given context, I probably can actually.

As an example of an output metric., I imagine I said,, the airline example., a business metric is,, I want to produce 80 arguments in the air and a metric or,, I might be using the model correctly,, identify 90% of air traffic potential., that's what I said. I,, I feel it's just trying to take a wrong.

In every case, we try to find things that were wrong.. Today I think the same thing., thank you for this question.

 again, I think the same thing, I think if you did the same thing for the k fold question,

I think in the when I read the feedback, it was I should explain the specific process of k for personalization.. And the best way to see if I get to more points off or otherwise to too picky on things and take the points off..., I mentioned this to you, but on the opposite side, there's one question that I, I don't on, and I gave the same score as the.

Questions that I didn't guess on.. I think when you just read out the scoring a little bit more.. I think it's a to too tight. It's defaulting to two out of three in most cases... your answer wasn't bad, but, if we had,, about five or something instead,

I might have given it a three out of five instead or two and three or something that.., definitely. We C are pretty good.

I feedback. Thank you. I to go back and review,.. unfortunately once now once you close it out there's not a way to see it.

But will, one of the things I know that is,, for next week,, I'll add in a little button or something that you can,,

just export it that you can,, you can send it off,, you can get the questions, the model answers, the feedback it gives you.

 you can hold on to that if you want to.. Other suggestions.

 a couple of things we'll try for next week. the export functionality, I'll work on the grading a little bit.,.,

I have to think about the best way to do that and having a rubric guide

moving more towards a rubric versus a comparison to a model answer., could be might end up being more useful in terms of the feedback it provides you., the grading, the point grading.

I'll space out a little bit more., I'm debating whether the even, the what I really care about is,,,

I don't care if you got, a three,, three out of three or a two out of three., the way that the, the, the model works now is it's a four point scale.

A zero means it's it's basically completely wrong., you didn't even attempt it or you just didn't put anything relevant.

A one means it's mostly incorrect. maybe, put something, but you pretty much got it wrong.,, a two means it's pretty good.

It's mostly. Mostly correct. Maybe you missed,, some minor details or something.

 generally, that's why I said don't don't get hung up on your scoring because,, 2 or 3 is,

is good basically,, the way it's set up now,, 0 or 1 not great., but maybe we'll spread out the scoring a little bit more to give the model a bit more range to differentiate things.

And we'll try to do,, scoring based on a rubric,, for each,, for each question.., also, I don't know if this would be possible, but I'm a slow typer.

And, for me to answer these questions, I know,

I know these concepts may actually be able to explain it and think about it takes me a little bit of extra time.

And then when I type it out, that also takes me a little bit less time., either having more,, time to do it or maybe cutting down questions, but,, that took about 20 minutes or, maybe a little bit more, which is a little bit more than I'd to spend.,. The points are., the points are, the points are fine.

But., maybe doing three questions each week or something that.. Because I know you're not the only,, not the only a solitary for his folks.

It takes some time, is it. Oh,. I was also going to say multiple choice would definitely be faster.

But that isn't really getting our understanding. Yes.

I don't really multiple choice.,, obviously that would be simple and easy for grading to.

But, as you probably all know from lots of experience with multiple choice questions,

it's too easy to guess your way,, into things with multiple choice,,

and actually forcing you to,,

forcing your brain to recall the answer to something versus just seeing the answer on the page and reacting to it as a completely different thing.,, actually, what I'm trying to do with this is force, force your brain to, to make it come back,, to the front versus if you just see it there,, it's pretty easy to indicate it., it's,. This is really a learning activity, not a not a testing activity., trying to train your brain to,, to practice recall of these things.. I think generally tickets only gave me a good understanding of.,, what, I don't know. I think generally the core idea which.

Good. Good. It's great. I think something else that I don't know if this is possible, but it might also be helpful if,,, just as a study tool because you said, if this is to help study and do all that stuff,

maybe being able to use it in advance with,, this is a full set of questions,

because if you're giving it the whole PowerPoint, then there's a ton of questions that I can ask us.

And maybe, do you want to do that beforehand to help study them during class might also help., I'm thinking about creating a version actually that I just make available to you all that it's an interview

prep version where I just you can just see that with a whole bunch of questions on all different topics,

and then you can go through on your own time and practice,

or you can pick a topic and practice on that topic or something if you want.,, I really would that. Cool..

And maybe we'll do that., I, I was going to say that this quiz and also what you were saying reminds

me of Quizlet because they have the learning function and the test function.., that, we could take the test on something that and then if you get it wrong, keep going you get better..,., Quizlet is it.

I think the way that in my experience.

 if I got one wrong then it would mark that and then put it in a separate pile.

And then after I finish all of the questions, then it would go back and ask me that again until I, start to get it.. Cool.. If I create a self a self service version of some, some, we need to do something that is., but the ones in one pile the wrong it's in another and keep,

keep bringing the wrong ones back or different variants or something that to practice on., I had to get that little bit of thought, but I think I was thinking about that last night.

Maybe I can create one for practice for interview prep., I think I told you this in the first class, too. In the ideal world, I would have made this., I should make an oral quiz. have it verbally ask you those questions, and then have you verbally respond.

That would help with your typing issue. Also,, but we can't have 20 something of you all trying to talk to at the same time in this room., that doesn't work very unless we do it at home instead., but we'll see. Maybe I'll play with that,, for later in the semester., but,, we can expect, I think, at the start of every week, or we'll kick off class with,, some variant of this activity.

The practice.. I was expecting more of,, a chalkboard style quiz., where you ask, you question and you respond and ask you more that., that's what I was expecting. More,, more an interactive.. I just comment.

 maybe something that flows a little bit more rather than just,, one question and next question and the next question.

That would also help if there's a particularity that you didn't quite.., just make sure that you did all the ones I ask give it chance for redemption.,. Maybe we'll play around with,, with something that.. The original version of this a couple years ago was more of a chat style to it.

And that would be weird because there'd be a weird balance between the interview and actually seeing if you understand the concepts.,, I have to think about how that might have a good work.. It's an interesting idea., or maybe have it structured this, but then allow you once you submit your answer and it gives you the feedback,

then it allow you to go into a chat on it or something that.

 if something's not clear or you want a more explanation on something, you could of click a button, enter a chat to discuss that.

 that particular question or something maybe. Cool.

All., hopefully, hopefully.

It sounds generally despite some of the,, the challenges, which is normal for a first time try and something it generally was helpful.,,, we'll try it again, next week.

Today. I missed my body., because you've been working for a while.

Sorry. Canvassers have been working. Oh.

It's not. It's down again.,. What's,..,, I'll,, I shall try to,, take a look and figure out what's going on.. Thanks. Thanks for letting me know. Sounds something's,., work on something that..

 let's finish up our discussion on,, metrics today.

Last time we talked about,, regression metrics., we're gonna switch over today and talk through classification metrics, and then we'll,, jump into our,, our algorithms classification.. Generally when people think about classification,, accuracy is always the thing that comes to mind.

And that's the most common thing that you'll see in people reports of accuracy., something, but accuracy,, even though it's easily understood and fairly intuitive,

it can be,, it can be very deceiving,, depending on the specific problem you're working on.,, a particular case where accuracy is deceiving is when you have a high class imbalance,, for a classification problem.

 to take a tangible example of this. suppose you're building some model to predict,, based on,,,

lab results or electronic medical records, whether patients have some very certain specific rare disease., you compile a data set of thousands of patients, you get a whole bunch of features.

And the,, target you're trying to predict is a 0 or 1.

Either they have the disease or they don't have this disease., you build a classifier model, and your classifier,, you measure its accuracy and it comes up with 99.4% accuracy.

I have predicted every single one is,, false.,. You could you could get 94% accuracy by just predicting zero or false for everybody.. And not even spend any time building your mouth.., if the data set is highly imbalanced, meaning that the vast,

vast majority of folks are zero and you only have very few ones and you decide to measure accuracy,

you could get a great accuracy score by doing absolutely nothing., that's a good example of where,, accuracy can be can be very misleading., a better approach,, to measuring,, the quality of a classification model is using what we call a confusion matrix., those of you have taken my classes before, I'm sure you've seen this., this is a simple matrix where on one axis we have the actual value.

A 0 or 1 or a cat. Cat, a dog., on one axis here you have the actual value.

Is it actually is zero actually or one. And then on the other axis you have the prediction that I predicted positive or that I predicted a negative.

And we can tie,, classification. We have a lot of classification metrics., and it becomes very hard to try to remember the formulas for all of them.

All,,, we have some terminology for the parts of the confusion matrix.. When we predict one and it's actually a one.

It's a true positive. When we predict a one, it's actually a negative.

It's a false positive. When we predict,, a negative, it's actually a positive false negative.

And then of course are true negatives here. those are the four parts of the confusion matrix is, the first one, the false negatives.

Shouldn't that be. You are not in fact. Take a look at it and,, one,, false.

Negative.. we predicted,., we predicted that,,, and it was actually a cat.

 cat is,, cats. Cats positive., in this case, a dog is negative. The way they're defining is.. Depending on how we're defined,

I actually don't I was looking at this last night and realize this is actually maybe more confusing than helpful because it's which,, it's hard to know whether that is a dog or cat positive., I'm not sure.. let's let's talk about our metrics here and tie them back to these parts of the confusion matrix.

The first one is what we call our true positive rate or TPR.

There are a lot of names often for the same metric. you may find it called recall or sensitivity.., rather than trying to memorize the formula for these things, what I would suggest is try to remember,, what question they're trying to address., that's the that's the main thing. And that will also help you determine when, when it's applicable or not.

 true positive rate or recall., back to our model measuring trying to predict patients with a rare disease.

 the recall of a model to do that would be out of all the patients that actually have that rare disease.

How many did we correctly identify as having that... And then,, you can see the parts of the confusion matrix.

The way you calculate that is,, the true positives over true positives press false negatives.

 out of all the positives and denominator, how many did we predict where the positives the true positives.. Then we have,, the false positive rate, which is,.. And then we have,, what's called the precision.

 precision answer is a different question than that recall.

 again recall was out of all the actual positives, how many did we predict or positive.

All. Precision is the opposite question, which is, out of the ones we predicted as being positive, how many were actually positive.. of all the patients we predicted as having that rare disease, how many of them actually had that rare disease.. And precision and recall tend to work in,, in tension with each other a little bit..

 as you tune your model, you may find that you increase recall, but you heard precision or you increase precision, but you heard recall,.

It's hard to try to optimize for,, for both of those things.. And,, generally speaking, depending on the problem you're trying to solve,

it'll make more sense that you use one or the other of,, of these,,, of these metrics.

Fraud detection.., that would probably be.

Because you don't really care if,, there is no fraud., you really want to try to find whenever,, say, your credit card is we can just use.

Because you really want to make sure you catch any instances of fraud.. you're willing to tolerate maybe, a few cases where you feel something is fraud.

And it wasn't actually fraud in exchange for making sure that you're you're catching all of it, all the potential cases of fraud., that's that's an inconvenience. But it's not,, awful.

 you want to maybe optimize for a recall in the case.

It's a good one. Anybody have a good one for precision when you want to optimize for precision., maybe making,, a diagnosis of it.

I see these guys, I think., I would think maybe I could tell us.

I would think that a lot of cases in the medical world,, you might want to optimize for precision., you don't want to,, tell people that don't have cancer that they do have cancer.., you want to be pretty sure that somebody actually has that disease,,

when you communicate to them, actually,,, that there's lots of tests that are two parter.

 the first one will actually not emphasize precision.

We just want to catch something in case it's something scary, something cancer.

And then there will be a smoking gun. High precision test.

 actually confirm that one is typically more expensive.

Or you need the prior authorization to order it., lots of radiology scans, though are not high precision.

They can be a million different things, including nothing.

 mostly you're thinking pathology or actual, getting the cells and looking them under a microscope... that's great.

 that's a good example where you might, you might have a multi-stage process where maybe stage one you're optimizing more for recall.. Trying to catch everybody that might have,, a certain disease in that stage too.

You're optimizing for precision, really trying to make sure that,, the people you diagnosed with that actually do have that disease.

It's hard that you can't really optimize for both.

It's very difficult to optimize for both. Usually end up learning to pick one or the other to try to optimize for.. Is there one. with precision or recall do both them or one of them I guess.

 it does precision correlate strongly with bias.

And the recall correlates strongly with.

Very, very generous.. Not necessarily.

No. Not necessarily. Because,, bias and variance are measures of error, and error can be wrong.

And you can be in either direction. it's not necessarily the thing according to you to precision recall... This is a helpful gesture.

I don't expect you to remember all these things., you will not be asked.

And the knowledge check next week on the formulas for these things., maybe precision recall, but,, not the rest of these., but this is helpful., in case you,, are asking about some specific metric, you can you can.. let's just test check here understanding of this real quick., suppose we build a model and the model ends up predicting every observation as positive.

Shout out if. No way.

Depends on the data set.. let's let's say again we're measuring, ah some disease,.

Based on a bunch of different,, measurements and records and on.

And,, the, the disease, having the disease, we treat it as a positive.

Hi. Hi.. once the question recalls answering the.

What do we not really know because we have the prediction, but not actually what the true observation is... let's assume let's assume now we have we have the actual observations.

And we're able to compare to calculate the recall..

 recall again is out of out of all the positives.

How many did we predict as being positive..

 if we predict everybody is having that disease then by default we've we've caught all the positives.

We've successfully predicted the folks that have the disease,

but we've also predicted that everybody else that doesn't have the disease has the disease.. recall is actually 100% if the model predicts everybody is positive.., but what about let's get to the let's get to that.

 false positive rate. Hi.. Good. We got a lot of false positives. If we predict everybody has a disease and it's maybe a rare disease, not everybody has a disease.. Out of all the true was false..

However, however, is helpful for you to think about it.

Whether it's,, going back to this,,, thinking about thinking about this here or just thinking to me,

Depending on the show of how common versus rare that particular disease is, but the recall is probably lower than it should be.

Sorry, the precision is lower than it shouldn't be. All.

 we feel they got that difference between us... now we're going to,, move into, another form of,, I think we'll try and get through this,, take away,, assessment.

 one of the problems with point assessments, particularly with classification models, is they can be very deceiving.

And we use recall to look at our model performance, we may we're going to have a great and a great recall.. that's problematic.. That's not that's misrepresenting the quality of our model.

We talked about the problem with accuracy earlier on.

 that's not great. If it's imbalanced. precision can also have its problems as., typically what we'll do with classification models is rather than just use a single metric,, to evaluate the quality, we'll use,, a combination of metrics.

And one of the most popular ways to do that is through what we call,,, roc, or receiver operating characteristic curves..

And this is actually this is, a plot of the true positive rate and false positive rate of your model at different threshold values.. what's the threshold,, a classification model,, returns a probability of the positive class., if we think of a binary model.. it's not the output of our classification model is typically not the one or the zero.

It's some,, probability between or 1 or 0.

And that probability represents the probability of the positive class or probability of a one.

And to turn those probabilities into 1 or 0 predictions, we compare it to some threshold value between 0 and 1.

And commonly typically that threshold is set at 0.5.

 if we if the model output is 8.6 it's a it's above 0.5.

 we predict a one. If it's a 0.3 it's below 0.5.

 we predicted zero.

And that's how we turn the probabilities into the zeros and ones provided that by default that probability is or that threshold is set to 0.5.

But we can change that,,, if we want.

And when we create a,, ROC curve,, we will change the threshold,, and we'll plot the probability,,

recall and the precision, sorry, the true positive rate and the false positive rate at each different threshold value.

All. let's think about why does why this changing the threshold impact the true positive rate and false positive rate.

 if we have a model and we take our default 0.5 threshold.

And we calculate some performance of it. What happens now to the true positive rate.

If we bump that threshold up from point five all the way up to 0.9, meaning that to predict a positive it has to be above 0.9.

Otherwise it's a negative prediction. But let's say it goes up true positive rate goes up.

It goes. Because now..

That's for catching.. we're catching less of the,., because we may have positives that get predicted,, a point eight, but we're predicting them as negatives.

We're more sure about the ones we,, are predicting.

And if we go the other way,, it works in the opposite direction.,, to build a ROC curve,, what we do is we,.

Run the model at and get predictions at,, different thresholds., let's take a simple example. Let's suppose we have five points.

Here's the prediction from our model. The raw prediction.

Here's the actual value.., and I have a threshold of 0.3.

 here's the predictions that we make...85 is above 0.3, and point of four below point six above, above.

Versus if we use a threshold of 0.5, points number one, three and five are above the 0.5.

 there are ones, the others are zero. And if we bump it up to 0.7, the only one that's predicted as a positive is the point number one at.85.. then we can calculate for each of those different threshold values.

We can calculate a true positive rate and a false positive rate.. And now we have a set of three points., and we can plot those points as a curve.., where we can calculate, we can try them on the false positive and true positive rate.,, axes.

And,, we just showed three, but you can actually do this for many and create many points and then connect them all up as a, as a curve.., and then you'll get a,, chart that looks something this., blue line. All. And that's how I bought the,, tracker.

All. If we come up with multiple models,,

 a perfect classifier, if it always had perfect predictions, would actually just be up there.

 the closer we get towards that, the better our model is.., if we were randomly picking zeros or ones.

We'd have a line that looks this on a diagonal line.. if you have if you plot the curve for your model and it looks this green curve, that's probably a good sign.

It's not it's not really performing much better in that random forest versus the orange is a little bit better.

The blue is quite a bit better.. now we can visually see that how these different models make appearing to me.

Does that mean you always have some plots that you start with.

Sorry. There's you always have to plot the random, the random line., this line, you don't have to. It's up to,, a lot of times you'll see a where that's not bothered.

It's just helpful. It's just a helpful reminder,, in this case.

Because that a random classifier is going to look..

Be true in the context of, class sizes or views.

And then just vary the probability,, based,, let's say it only happens 10% of the time.

You then just assume,, 10% classification rate, because I don't know if it's still a point five.. If it's if it's if the classes are highly imbalanced.. No, it'll be off.. I'll talk about that in just,, just a second how to handle that situation.., what we can do in addition to just plotting these and if you read,, research papers or blogs or something,

you may see these kinds of plots,, and then you can visualize and see which model is better., you can also calculate the area under the curve or we call the ROC area under ROC.., by looking at what's the,, what's the area underneath this, this line or this line or this line.. And the closer we get,, up to that perfect classifier, the closer our area under the curve is going to be positive.. we can actually use the area under this curve as a metric for calculating performance,

which, takes into account both true positive rate and false positive rate of our model.. this then would be more robust than just picking precision or just picking recall to evaluate.

All., an alternative to the rock is,, we call it precision recall., and this is now plotting,, recall over,, and,, precision against each other.

All., and we're adjusting the that threshold value, and we're calculating the precision and the recall for all the different threshold values.

 this,, looks a little bit different. That goes in the opposite,,, direction here.

And you can see the tension between,, that recall and precision tend to work in opposite ways., and you can visualize that trade off. All., I understand why precision recall is preferred over something sensitivity versus specificity., that's what it's commonly used for classification is.,. In the medical field, you see sensitivity, specificity,, in the broader machine learning field, we tend not to use those terms., and you'll hear them talk about precision recall... I'm not sure.

I don't think it was a strike other than the other. I think it depends on the use case.., and in particular in the broader and the broader context for machine learning, we tend to think about precision recall., the advantage here, the advantage of a precision recall curve over the,, RC curve was if your,, classes are highly imbalanced., again, if it's a rare disease, for example, you have mostly zeros and a few ones.,, your,, RC curve is going to be a bit deceiving.

The, the,, PR curve will give you a better indication of your actual performance because it's not factoring in the true negatives.

you can have a low quality model that will have a lot of true negatives by just predicting everything is negative., and,, and that's going to reward you the RC car.., whereas those are true negatives aren't being factor then, to the precision recall curve.

 you don't get that false benefit rate of the way where you, either what you'll see both of these used to be different cases.

I'd say that ROC curve is more commonly used..

But,, you also see precision recall use in particular when you've got situations with class imbalances.

All,,, we can extend this idea to what we call the,, multi-class confusion matrix.,, far we've been talking about binary classification. It's ones or zeros., typically or often., we'll be working with,,, more than just two classes.., and we can still use the confusion matrix, and now we have additional,,, now it's a, it's a broader matrix.. in this case, it's simple. This is the iris data set. We have three pieces of iris.., we have the true label. And then we have our predicted label.. And the, the,,, the, the,, measuring on the diagonal will give us an indication of how, how good our model is doing.. if,, our model were perfect, all of the values would be on the diagonal matrix.., we can see that we're actually doing pretty, but we've got some issues here confusing virginica and versicolor.,, passes.., and this is very easy to generate these things using scikit learn.,, and this is a very helpful way to look at it in particular., one of the most useful things about actually visualizing the confusion matrix is helping to identify where there's there's issues.. if I were to do this and I where they just look at the overall accuracy or overall precision recall or something that., and I'd say,, the model is not perfect.

It's got some, it's got some issues., but if I actually visualize this now, we can actually see that the model is almost perfect.

Except it's, it's got one issue here between virginica and versicolor,.

That's an insight. Now I can see where the model is failing.

Not just that it's failing sometimes. But I can actually see where is it actually failing.. And then I can think about what can I do about that.,,, pictures in this case or,, or measurements from versicolor and virginica.,, categories..

A lot of times if you have a multi-class situation, you don't have perfect class balance.

 you may have certain classes that are just not as represented in the data set., and therefore the model may not be able to learn them quite as.

And the only way you can really flag that is, if you look at it on a per class basis through something a confusion matrix,

and that'll help you identify those,, those issues.

And then you can think about that going to resolve them.., and then finally,, to wrap up our discussion on,, metrics, here is the F1 score., this is the for AI for F1 score. It's also good in the sense that combines precision and recall., which is useful. It's very common in research paper.

 if you read papers you'll see an F1 score report that,

one of the issues and one of the reasons F1 is not really used in industry very much is that it gives equal weighting to both precision and recall., and it's pretty rare that at least in the real world, that you want to weigh precision and recall equally.

Usually one or the other is more important,, for your particular problem.,, it's,, hedging too much if you just give people waiting for both of them., let's take our, ten minute break here.

Five 1015 will restart and then we'll switch over to linear regression., behind this single,, we didn't see any news...

Seems lower now, if you see anyone's.

Oh... Up the side..., I want to work on that. I might put it behind a single sign on to.

But even then,.,.

You just give each person.. You just you don't even have a slash.

Exactly. Pretty sure that's it.., if it's if it's.. I think.. I don't know if I could have you just the side.,. Thanks for the heads up.. If you want to clarify it, editing the slides or and ask the questions.

You want high recall on the first of all my sensitivity and high precision secondary with us.., I'm getting lots of the round specificity.., that's I think that's down on some of the theories,,.., you don't precision or something..

You just you want good specificity in Yaml or Excel, but it's a little put us into bash really good at.

Recall the recall inverse precision makes a lot of sense because we're who cares about the true names.. And for me it's a bit more intuitive.

But I think that in the medical field, there's probably a reasonable reason for using assistive in specificity instead of instead of.

And then he was,. And,, just having,, sensitivity versus specificity, performances that, that actually is what RFC is.

 I. it's not computing exactly.. it's look familiar I know it's unfortunate that everybody uses different terminology and even in other fields you're your.. The same. That's the one that, is in business they use the term exhaustion as an intelligence method and.. Variables.. It's I, I really,, I wish we can all agree on the same terminology,,, of course,.

Thank you. For,, say, are you always.

Oh, the excellent American astronauts., hum., it is for certain topics. And I do have the attachments.. Did you go to that,, space,, initiative kick off.

Thanks, everybody. I think I am actually one of the people helping to get it.

They want to do a new master's program. And I'm hoping that, at least from the students perspective, great recommendations.

And then,, there's not a lot of space medicine people have any..,, I'm working with,, scientists, researchers, but third point person.

 that's cool. That's great., I saw that. I thought I would join for that.

It's hard to you if you want to attend. it's a cool initiative.

That's great. Just give me all the lead., and astronauts.. Great..

I would love to take my son through in this space as., he would love to come and see that. That's how I have these five.

Yes, but,, that's the perfect age to get,, there's quite a bit more,, it's more than the average.

It's thought about all the different,, I think in the history of these YouTube videos about,,,, how the space shuttle is built and how the Apollo rockets were always,, it's you could show a picture of a rock and I'll tell you, if it's Saturn Fire or Falcon Heavy or something else.

Let's see. It gets into the engineering of them now.

I,, there's,, we made an online course that assumes no backgrounds and just a fun intro when you sing demos.

 I think I see that.. Coursera..

Cool. I have to check that out sometime.,. Mean,, we taught it to high schoolers as.. Those are you,, classes.,. those are, those are for,,, motivated high schoolers, but.

That's great.. I'll check that out sometime., it sounds really neat. And where the high scores.

He was. I can count for something. Or we did it., during Covid. it was all virtual..

It was fun because I used to be in Houston., one of my good friends or younger sister's best friend was taking that golf course.

Oh, wow.,,, at one point when we were back in person and I was an intern or an employee, and they were all intern,

and she asked,,, we met at a lake house and I saw her was, oh, there's more of my students all over.,. That's great. I'll go home and they look after the astronaut,, main speaker or keynote speaker.

She said that she got into,, what, you into the space camp.

And., when she was,,, I did, I did space camp a few times., I would say I was a dinosaur. I wasn't very keen on space.

I was very much in the space between aerospace, mechanical and undergrad.

 I did my first job after school was to work there.

And that's good.. Scientific and documentation.. Really up until., I just don't know, I feel I feel this is just less simulation too.. I first should have been my first job since has traced satellite, which is a simulation framework leveraging elements present material.. That can mean a lot.,. The current provost for education is aerospace., used to be there's a big emphasis on image mentioned.., yes.. Yes.. Propulsion I think did.. I want to continue to space people in the new space.

I'm happy to just thank you with the engines.

Sure.. I'll talk to them sometime. Maybe I can help in some way.

I think it's great because historically, I have these.

Since I was your professional, I would go up and some involvement theory.

I come in here as what said, I'm really not a lot of time on space because I'm used to.

That's.. it's, it's an, it's a more exciting field now it's up.

It's, it's just because of much private involvement.. When I was in things the other day is what I want to do with this.

 some of the very early private companies give me some ideas, but oh there you're not there is a lot of kids opportunities there.

No that's.

Do it at work. And it's just become a lot more realistic I think for most people actualize it.

 this is this. It's., I when I came through school. Really the only way to. Oh,.

And enjoy.. Is this type of thing which is actually since it's more separate, it's,., it's on a computer vision. I'm sorry.

Said. Yes, I suppose., sure. I tell you one thing., I don't know which I didn't get any recommendations.. It's just,, I didn't really know., and I'm sure that at least from my professor, I also was a contractor,.., and that was actually my. Is that people going to train on trains that we didn't.

Know.,.., I'd love to connect. Now an email.

I don't this one. I got to be a bachelor, it'd be two articles that are really going to look I didn't have any recommendations.. it all.. I think it was only about,, playing. Oh, that's great because I was, I can, I can, I can see.

Anyway, since what's going on, I can relate to you guys because I just based on the seven.

Years of space Legos.

Because I was. in this category which does not.. But. You are going to.

 I'm just going to put it this way..,..

Glass of. Wine.. But I. Think I what I this isn't much.

You guys should be you. I don't know,, the waitress, I don't think,.

 what you say to make.

But., just the other side of the system. It's just.

I think that comes to mind,, about,, the cocktail.

Oh,..,.

 you say, you don't want it used to be.

It's cool. It used to be. It's it's it's it's overall not great.

Oh,. That's what we have.

That's it. That's actually is no. Word yet but I.

They always. Say.

Let's go and restore that. no one was nice to anybody else have issues with,, installing the, from the requirements that txt file.

Yes.. Is it done by is not working for you.

It's because, one of the packages requires an older version of numpy or something, but another package requires.

 just, just remove the that the,, version specification and just let it.

It's fine. Never know. It's still actually has a version conflict.

Even if you remove if you if you're moving, you actually just have to make your own requirements on text.

I just started. Dependencies until it compiles., that's what I want to do it.. I can send you my Yaml file., but it was primarily because the version of Python needed to be specified, and once that resolves, it will not., there was one edit I had to make. Make your own.,.. It's always pretty easy that there should be fine., every once in a while, they scikit learn changes some things., unfortunately, some of the data, there are some,

 convenience functions that retrieve data from scikit learn sometimes actually change the data, set up different versions.

That's really the main reason that we try to standardize.

But, but, if it's not working, just use whatever you've got, it should be fine... We're going to switch over and I'll take a look at why., it's,, I suspect it's probably I'm using it Python three nine or something.

 it's probably has to do with the Python version, I would guess., but,., I'm not going to make everybody go back to 3D. If you're using something, something newer.,, I think just using whatever works is fine.

All., let's switch over and start our discussion on algorithm.

 we're going to start with the,, the simplest of them all,, pretty much, which is linear regression I'm sure everybody has seen before in,., probably lots of different classes., maybe I'll teach you a few things.

You didn't know about any regression today. Hopefully.,, first of all, a quick quiz.. We got a set of different models up here.

For a. We weren't sure a thing.,., keep your hands up.

If you say, be linear. Keep it up if.. I'm for the. And you're still up. Anybody think he., I'm coming back up for E!., and how about f. In a way.

No way. Maybe. Maybe.. Nobody's.

Nobody's believing that. I talked to my dad.

Not confident. Not confident enough to raise your hand. It's. There's no.

There's nothing wrong with that.., you should have been confident enough, because, actually, they're all in here.,, it's a trick question.

The,, linear models refer to linear with respect to the,, the coefficients or the parameters or also called the weights., w not,, the things that come after the weights.. if we look at,, all of these,, the key is that they're, they're linear,, with respect to these.. Because we could rewrite this.

And if I were to rewrite this,, in a different form, you'd probably say this is either.

 what if I told you this is y is equal to w zero plus w1 eight plus w2 being twice w3.

Doesn't matter what A, B and C are.. That would be linear.. In this case, I happen to say p is equal to this and c is equal to... Sorry I should have missed one. Maybe this is W3D and D similar to that.

 a b and C could be whatever we want them to be., but it has to be linear with respect to these. when would this when will this not be linear.

For example, if we had something,,, let's go back to one that you, I think most people agree on was an error.

Let's take c,, if c were rewritten as y is equal to w zero plus w1 x1 plus w2 x2 plus w1 times w2 times x3, that would then no longer be linear.. Because of the one times the w1 w2 times x, then is no longer one., but these actually are. whatever comes after the coefficients or the weights doesn't really matter.

These can be whatever we want them to be., because these are just features.

And when we write it this, we're actually just showing the detail of here's how this particular feature is calculated., I think everybody knows it sends a linear relationship between the features and the target.

 having a good understanding of it is important to understand the more complex models.

It also can be useful as a first model to get a benchmark on something., and in fact, for your first project,, which that we're going to kick off next week on,, weather forecasting,, and that require you to use a linear regression,, as one of one of your models that you,, that you'll use., simple. You'll hear a term simple versus multiple linear regression.

That's just a matter of how many,, features we have, a single feature or multiple features., I'm going to move through this because I'm assuming that most people have seen some of this before.

But if you if you haven't,, obviously the slides are often talk about any questions you have as you go., you can write you'll see linear regression written in different ways., you'll see a read,, for a single observation.. It'll look this.. The parameters of the linear regression equation are easy to interpret.

 w0 is the bias or the intercept, which would be the average value for the target if all the inputs were set to zero.., and the weights, are also very interpretable.

 they represent the average increase in the target,, when the corresponding feature is increased by one,

assuming all other features are held constant, which is the..

All. when we create a linear regression,, we are trying to find some function that looks that., with a goal of minimizing the error..

 what is the error of a function. If we look at graphically, it's just the difference between the prediction and the actual.

And we accumulate that across all of the,,, all the points that we have.., an alternative way to write that would be to minimize the,, sum of squared errors.

 rather than just minimizing raw errors in the first bullet,, we can square the error terms in and try to minimize that.,, a couple of reasons. One, it becomes irrelevant what direction the error is., when we when we square it,, and to it's mathematically a little bit more convenient, which we'll see in a minute.

 typically,, we,, talk about minimizing the sum of the squared errors or the errors., disagree.. And we call this the cost function or the loss function associated with linear regression.

 every algorithm, has a you can call it either cost function or a loss function as a cost function.

And when we use that algorithm,,

our goal is to try to find these set of parameters are weights for that algorithm which minimize the,, cost function.

That's really that's what we do in machine learning.

That's that's the core thing that machine learning does, is tries to minimize the cost function by adjusting the weights.

Because in,, any machine learning algorithm we have three elements.

We have the inputs, we have the outputs and we have the weights or the parameters or the coefficients.

All three of the same., we can't change the inputs, the x's, we can't change the outputs of wise.

The only thing we can change is the parameters or the weights.., we try to find the optimal set of parameters or weights which minimizes the cost function.., I think I just said it... The sum of square there. Here., we want to minimize that.

As we just said, we can't change the X's. We can't change the Y's., we have a couple. We have a couple of different ways that we can do that., in the case of linear regression.,, linear regression actually has a closed form solution.

 we could just take the derivative of the cost function, set it equal to zero and solve.., and then we could get our,, optimal set of points., secondly, we could apply,, an iterative solving method.,, in particular, one we commonly use it's called gradient descent, which is,

basically a search algorithm that converges on the optimal set of values in an iterative way., linear regression is unique among machine learning algorithms.

And even having the option of a closed form solution, most of them don't., typically we'll apply some an iterative solving method to, to converge to the optimal,, values., we can rewrite this.

I know for in particular, for those who haven't taken linear algebra, where it's been a while since you've taken linear algebra.

One of the confusing things when you're working in machine learning can be thinking through the dimensionality of things,

how they're set up,

 matrix multiplications,, that the,,, that the dimensionality works out to actually be able to multiply matrices together.

And we do we do a lot of matrix multiplication in particular when you get to,, to neural networks., I've tried, I tried to,, make it as intuitive and straightforward as possible,, with the notation here to help think through that.., if we were the, the vectorized form of this.., for a single observation, we have a y know, the prediction is equal to the,,

sum over the number of features of the W's,, the weights times the,, the features,, x I.., we can also rewrite that in vectorized form.

It would look this.. these would be,, the weights or coefficients for each of our features and then our intercept or bias term.

And then we'd rewrite our input as this. And we'd add a one for the to account for the bias or the intercept.. this is just an alternative way to write this., this is for a single observation.

Where the matrix of our predictions or y hat, is equal to our,, X's times.

The,,, our weights..

 an n by p plus 1YP plus one because we have p features and we had one for the bias or the intercept.

And then our weights are,, plus one by one., it'll look something this.., let's talk a little bit about the closed form solution for a moment and how that would work., our cost function is this or some square there,., y hat minus y squared., we can rewrite that in using a vectorized notation as this.

 where we have, is,, is y hat.

 y had minus y times where I have one as y,, and now what we want to do is try to minimize this cost function.. we want to minimize that. We could,, set the derivative with respect to w equal to zero.. And solve for w. that would look this.

And if we do some rearranging we can get to this. We just got the normal equation.

And then we can solve for w. and this is the solution to w.

And once we solve that now we have our set of weights that we can use in our linear regression model.., again, for folks who haven't taken their algebra or it's been some time ago and you don't remember a whole lot.

This might look a little bit scary. It's not that scary., it's fairly easy to do.

And,, I'm actually going to have you do the,, do this out in your homework., you're going to write this in Python just to,, refresh yourself or, or learn whatever the case may be,, how to do this and how to apply a closed form solution to a very simple,, linear regression problem.

 that would be one here., assignment two questions is to just work through these steps in Python and then, execute this to solve for.

All. Typically, in practice, we don't usually use the closed form solution.. Why it can get expensive to calculate if you have got a lot of features and a lot of data., almost always if you look at the documentation for scikit learn or any other machine learning package,

even a simple linear regression, I'll typically use an iterative solving approach for gradient descent or some other.

Variant of that., but you can do it using,, closed form,, closed form solution.

And we'll practice with a simple problem on the homework about how to do that.

All.. I should have asked you this before I showed you the slide., now, that's pointless to ask.,, there are some major assumptions that are made when we use linear regression., the first and the most obvious one is that the,, expected value for the target,, is a linear function of the inputs.., and that is,,.

That's how we get our straight line. And that's a, that's a major the oversimplifying assumption for most things.. Which is why linear regression is usually not the optimal model for most types of problems., unless you have a very rare thing, it's actually linear with respect to all the features., number two,, the errors.

 this is actually three assumptions in one here, but we'll call it one related to errors., the errors are uncorrelated random variables with zero mean and constant variance.. Meaning if the errors are not correlated with each other., number two, they have a mean of zero, which means on average they're,, the errors are zero and they have a constant variance., we'll come back to take a look at,, what that actually means in just a second.

And number three, that your features are independent..

 linear regression makes the assumption that you have independent or close to independent features that they're not., you don't have,, high degree of correlation between different features..,, if you, if these assumptions are violated and they typically are with any real modeling problem that you're doing,

that doesn't mean that linear regression can't work.

And,, theoretically,, it just means that it's probably going to be suboptimal.

It's probably not going to work very. All..

And,. If you violate any of these three assumptions,, you can still use any regression.

It may not give you an optimal fit., and typically these are,, you'll have one or more of these three violations,

meaning that the relationship between the inputs and outputs is not actually linear., you have non-constant variance of the errors,, or you have a high degree of collinearity between your features.., usually a lot of times features are actually related to each other and sometimes to a very high degree., in,, SLI, where you ask which of these are,, linear regression,,

versus here clarifying, for example, that you had the product or, x to some power.

Is there two things happening where you could have your big matrix X that is actually computed from smaller different variables,

 what it's getting at.,.

 the question was, if you think back to those examples, and we had one where we had something,

I'm gonna make it up a y is equal to x zero plus x one, sorry y is equal to w zero plus w1 times x squared.

Yes something that.. and we said that's a, that's a linear model., but we have this x squared term in there.

 why do we have x squared and not y when I x., maybe because,, y is not a, does not have a,, strong linear relationship with X,

but it actually does have a linear relationship with X squared.., and we decide to use x squared for our feature instead of x.. And that's a very valid thing to do.

And in fact in just a minute we'll talk about that is a is an actual strategy to make linear regression more useful., a good way. There are statistical tests we can use., I usually advocate for just visual tests,, as a simple way to check.,, in these,, two charts, it's probably obvious.,, the first problem is not only the unknown linearity of the,,, target feature relationship.

How can we see that here if we plot,,,, y versus X and our data looks this.

No.. Not really. All., another way we could see the same thing is if we plotted,,, our predictions versus the error terms.

Meaning that across the range of y hat, we have errors on both sides of the zero line.

In this case, we can see there's a clear pattern to our errors,.

 that's also another good indication that we violated the assumptions here., the other one. Non-constant variance of the errors.., let's,, in this case, we could also have,, let's say we have some model that's,, trying to predict income off of a set of features, including age as one feature., this would show that we have non-constant,, variance of the errors.. Another way to see that would be plotting the,, the predictions and the residuals.

Again, we can see that as the,,, y hat the prediction increases, the variance of our errors that scatter here is higher than back here.. that's also showing a different way of showing non-constant variance., if we had constant variance we would see consistent error bands going across here.

And same thing here. Are we seeing consistent Arabic going across.

All. those are good when we see things that. Those are good indications that., linear regression might not result in an optimal fit for our model.

 let's do this quickly together, visually.,, this is a plot of our,, residuals or errors,, versus our predictions.

Probably. There's some,, we can see some pattern to it.

It looks roughly this,., we can also see non-constant variance.. If you look at the variance up here,, in the residuals.

And then if you go over here and look at the variance here, see how much wider it is over there.

 that's another visual indication that we probably have, non-constant variance., as far as the third assumption,, checking for the independence of features., the best way to do that is to look at,, the correlation,,, between the features,, to,, identify collinearity.., and when we have high quality, high collinearity means high correlation between features,

means that,,,,, one of our features is highly dependent on another feature., there are some useful tools. we can we can obviously calculate the,, correlations between all our features ourselves.

There are some useful tools in scikit learn that can do that for you automatically and give you a nice,, correlation matrix that looks this.. these are all different. All of our,, different features., and we can find both,, axes here.

And then we can identify for example, here it looks ATV., ATV,, are strongly correlated with each other,.

And we want to be careful,, about any cases where we have a strong positive or negative correlation,,, between the,,, the features., know,, I used to I have a really good example of this, which is in the repo.

 I encourage you, if you're not doing it,

make sure you do take some time to go through the demo notebooks in the repo and also,, attempt the exercises there., you'll find for this week, there's a little demo and an exercise of a simple dataset on, on cars that were produced., I don't know when it was. It was a while ago, but,, and it's measuring,, it's looking at,, the fuel efficiency of cars., and it's trying to predict that based on different attributes of the engine.,, and,.

If you just take the data as is and model it and create a linear regression model,

and you look at the coefficients,,, identify some weird things,,

 you will see,, for example, there's a the mob,

the optimal linear regression model actually shows a positive relationship between,, engine size and capacity and fuel efficiency.

Bigger engines are more fuel efficient.,, higher capacity engines are more fuel efficient.

Generally. Generally not.,.

And the reason for that is because,,, we have a couple of features in that model that are highly correlated.

And when we have highly correlated features,, in the model, it doesn't know how to assign the weight between those highly correlated features.. it randomly will place more weight on one and less weight on another,

to the point where it may even flip the sign of a relationship of one of those two features..

And you may end up with some weird things, including that,, that fuel efficiency is positively correlated with,, engine size.

And you don't care if you have some weights that don't seem to make a lot of sense., but if you care about understanding the relationships,, and interpreting the model,

 if your goal is to try to interpret the model or understand the relationships, having,,

features in the model that are highly correlated is going to be disruptive to doing that is going to cause problems with your ability to interpret it., you're actually often better off by removing one of the highly correlated features.. Again, if all you care about is prediction, how can I predict doesn't really matter.

You just leave them all and then you don't worry about it., but if you care about interpretability and understanding the relationships, you do want to be careful about having highly correlated features., both included in the model.

And usually you're better off taking one of them out,, because that will give you a more true representation of,, of the actual relationships.. at what point,, what would be how do you make that decision of,

I need to take this out versus I should just simplify these set of features using something PCA., I never I actually never advocate using,

PCA for simplifying the set of features because it actually changes the dimensionality or,, or the space of the features, and it makes it less interpretable., but you could, use statistical tests, for example, to reduce the number of features.., we're going to talk next week about ways to do that..,, I'll give you a quick answer today and then we'll talk a little bit more, I think, actually about feature selection..., feature selection again, it's one of those things that's a lot more art and science, and it depends on your goals as.

 if your goals are interpret the,,, include interpretability or are heavily weighted towards interpretability,

usually you're better off simplifying and reducing your feature set as much as you can., if your goal is purely performance in terms of prediction capability,, a lot of the times you actually bother just leaving all the features in,, and maybe using a more complex model to handle the larger feature set or something that., that's that's the way I'd suggest to think about feature selection.,, the problem that removing features as it has a clear benefit,

which is it makes the model easier to interpret,, by having less features.

And you can see true relationships between things.

The problem that you can run into when you do that is that some of those features you remove maybe actually have a little bit of value.

And when you remove them, you actually find a little bit worse performance,, than you had if you had left them all.

 you can have that trade off between performance and interpretability.

And to me, feature selection is a lot about figuring out getting to the balance,

that you feel you've got a good balance between simplicity and interpretability and,, good, strong performance on the other side.

 we'll talk. We'll talk more detail next week about how to think about.., if, as I said earlier,, we can still use linear regression even if we are violating them., the answer is that,, by checking and flagging violations, it can help us think about how we can maybe,, address those violations that our model will work better.

For example, if we identify that there's a non-linear relationship between the inputs and outputs or a particular input feature and the output,

we could actually transform our input feature.

 instead of if we say that,, there's a non-linear relationship between x to Y our target.

Maybe what we should do is use,, x2 square, where the square root of x2 as our feature instead of x,., we're not only bound to the form, we have our features and we can create transformations of those original features.

And if we find a transformation of a feature has a more linear relationship with the target,

then our model is going to work better if we use that transformation instead of the original feature., likewise, we can actually apply transformations on the output target as., and in particular, if we see non-constant variance,, of the errors,, that's a good sign that you might want to consider transforming the output., target.

And then finally, if we have collinearity or correlation between features, we might even consider simplifying our feature set to remove some of that,, correlation,, and get to a smaller, truer sense,, set of features.. The moat. The main.

Transformation or a thing that we will do in linear regression to make it work better is transforming the input features.

 if we see something this where we have x versus y,

and it looks that applying just a linear,, model is not going to work very.., to better model,, relation,, relationship that's non-linear,, between an input feature and an output,

we, we can use some transformation which creates a new feature, Z, which is maybe SDA or Z equals log x., would be two. Two ways we could do that.. And then we could use Z as a new feature in our model.

And we can choose whether we want to retain the original feature X or we want

to remove the original feature X and just use the new feature Z in our model.., and this is typically referred to as polynomial regression.

When we do this, a simple way,, to do this, if we don't know and we don't want to just do a bunch of trial and error,

let me check x squared and see how linear is that with respect to y.

Let me try out,, a simple way to do this would be to just choose a power,,

degree three and say we're going to take,,, all of our input features, and we're going to use all of them in three forms., we just have a single feature X, we're going to use X in our model, we're gonna use x squared.

And we're going to use execute as three different features. in our bottle.

All., and then we're going to run our model, and we're going to,,

just let it do its thing, and it's going to learn the values for w1, w2, w3.

And if it turns out that x cubed has a close to linear relationship with Y,

our model through the training is going to learn that maybe assign a high weighting to execute that, maybe low to a low W1.

And way to our original feature.., and when we apply this polynomial transformation,, again we have, we have the option by default.

And most commonly, will still retain the original feature.

And we actually retain every,, power up to whatever power we decide to go up to.

 three in this case. we'll actually keep actually keep that square keep cubed.

We could also remove these two.

And just do this if we want to. But it's more commonly to keep them all in and just let the model 

do its thing and figure it out for itself by how the size of the weightings., the other thing we will commonly do is add what we call interaction terms.,,, linear regression assumes each feature is independent of the other features in the real world.

A lot of times features are related or have some,, interaction with each other..

 meaning that if you change a one, the value of one feature, it causes the relationship between another feature and the target to change..., I'll take a this can be hard to,.

Hard to know. And a lot and hard to tell from the data as.

A lot of times this relies on,, human subject matter expertise to know this.

 to give you a really specific example to help you understand the value of these interaction features,,, we'll come back to our outage prediction model., outages, power outages are a,,, function of., the of the wind speed. Wind makes trees fall over.

Trees fall on the power lines., it causes a power outage., we also commonly model. We also commonly use precipitation as a feature as., and that's commonly used as a feature to when you do outage prediction.

But there's actually an interaction between the rain recent rainfall and the wind speed.., meaning that,, if we have not had a lot of,, recent rain, then the ground is very hard.

And it takes a lot of wind to knock a tree over.

Whereas if a ground is very wet and saturated and muddy,, it may take less wind for the tree to, to fall over., the value of recent rainfall actually changes the relationship between wind speed and power outages.

 that's a good example of an interaction between two different features., and to account for these types of interactions will often add, an interaction term in here.., and the way we do that is we if we have two features, x1 and x2 and we, we believe that there's some interaction between those two things.

We'll create a new feature, x3 which is x1 times x2, and we just add x3 into our model without the weight as.., and that's easy to do. And that's what's called an interaction term., and you see that very commonly used, both of the polynomial regression.

 adding the power terms and the adding these interaction terms are very common.

 if you're in industry, if you're in industry and you're working with a linear regression model,

for example, because you really value high interpretability and simplicity,, you'll, you'll almost always include power terms and interaction terms to account for a lot of those non-linearities., and that's, that's what,, allows a linear regression model to actually still work,

even if the, the relationships it's modeling are not obviously linear.

All. We're going to do an attack.. Oh my goodness., we're going to talk about it. an adjacent subject of linear regression called regularization., regularization means we can define it for us., that's the way I've seen it. It's usually a term used to reduce overfitting., exactly. It's it's a it's a way to reduce overfitting.

Because, ah, the way we train it is minimizing that error rate on the training set.

And,, often the way one way we can minimize error is let's just add more and more complexity into the equation.

Let's add more features. Let's add interaction terms. Let's add power terms., and we end up with a really complex equation., but that happens to minimize the error on the training set.., one way we try to find a balance between performance and complexity is by adding is through what we call regularization,

which is adding,, some a penalty term that penalizes complexity.. our, our cost function, the way it's structured rewards complexity because complexity usually drives down error.

But we can balance it out by adding a penalty term which penalizes for complexity into our cost function.., and here's what this looks.

Some square there. Looks that.., if we were to apply regularization, we will add a penalty term into our cost function.

 our new cost function becomes the original cost function.

 the squared error plus this penalty.

Which is penalizing complexity in way., and in particular, with linear regression, we penalize we penalize costs in terms of, features or in terms of number of features..,, the penalty term we use is actually a function of the sum of the feature weights.

Which causes our overall cost to increase., but as we add more features, that also results in lower error.

 if this part goes down as we add features generally but this part will go up.. they offset each other. when we use regularization we have these offsetting things.

 adding features will cause error to go down but can only go up.

Removing features causes error to go up and penalty to go down.

And what we are now trying to do by optimizing or minimizing this is find some the balance,, between the performance or error and the penalty that we're applying.. And we can control which one of these two terms adds more,,

which one is more important error or complexity by a,, scalar, a constant lambda that we can set.

 if we want to if we want to strongly penalize complexity, we might set this to be high.

If we don't want to penalize complexity very much, maybe just a little bit, we can set that to be less.

All.,, there are two primary,, forms of regularization used in linear regression.

And actually,, I go by different names.

 they're called lasso and ridge.

And you hear people refer to as lasso regression or ridge regression depending on which form of regularization is being applied.., let's take a,, lasso regression first.

 y minus y hat squared. sum of square error.. In the lasso regression we add another penalty term, which is our,,

constant lambda that we can set times the sum of the absolute values of the weights., this is now applying a penalty as the,, the sum of W increases as we add more features, or as the values for w are higher.

We're being., and this is an interesting thing because when we try to optimize this,, when we try to minimize this cost function,, what this is actually doing is encouraging us to drive these weights down to zero,.

Because if all the weights were at zero. There would be no penalty.. If they're very close to zero, the penalty term would be very low.

 this is incentivizing us to bring the weights down towards zero.., and we can actually consider this lasso regression to be a form of feature selection as., particularly as we increase the value of lambda, as we strongly penalize this,, it's going to it's going to try to push the values of our parameters,

our weights down to zero, starting with the ones that don't add a lot of value in terms of prediction.. if we have a few features that are in there that are not really that useful in predicting the output,

it's going to push the weights of those down to zero. It's just a get these out of there.

They're not really helping me improve the error, but they're adding to my beta.

 it's going to try to force those out. we use regularization to minimize the complexity in a model.

And you said that's is regularization a form of taking away features how you would make a model more simple,

or is this another separate..

It's not, not,, not always a way of removing features because there are different forms of regularization., some of them, this one here, actually happened to do it by removing features.

Other ones don't actually remove features., the next one we'll talk about ridge regression.

The difference there is it won't actually force the weights all the way to zero.

They'll set them to be very small values, but they'll still be there.

 it's not actually taking away any features., there are other forms of regularization we'll talk about with neural networks that also don't touch features.

But,, it's not quite the same thing as feature selection or removing features., but it's a way of,, penalizing complexity in any of the forms.

And most commonly that form is, is,, related to the number of features in the weights of those features., you can think of it as a,, as a way of trying to simplify the model.

Sometimes that simplification is achieved by removing features.

Other times it's achieved by doing other things. in what instance would you use this instead of just removing features.,, if you don't know what features to remove,, then you might use something this.

And this is actually going to achieve it for you., let me go.

Let me,, skip over Ridge for just a second here.., ignore this for the moment.

Focus on this., this is showing what happens to the coefficients or the weights of.

 we have a bunch of features. each of these,,, beta lines is a different feature.. That's. I guess, in our model, to start that way.

And this is the lambda. this is controlling that penalty factor.. And when lambda is zero there's no penalty term.

It's just our standard sum of squared error. cost function.. And when there's no penalty term this is showing what the values would be for the weights of each of those features.. we'd have eight features in our model, using just some square there as we increase the penalty term,

look at what happens to the weights or the feature values.

These couple of features as we increase it to and it's not marked here, but as we increase it to here,

these two features have now gone to zero I changed it, features have now gone to zero.. if I increase lambda to here, I've now gone from eight down to five features.. Because these have been driven down to zero. Why have these been dragged down to zero.

Because these features have been found to really not be very helpful in predicting the output.. They contribute only a very small amount to actually predicting the output., and they're the first ones that get driven down to zero by the penalty term because they the lambda the penalty terms,

trying to get all these features out of there..

But the sum of squared error term is trying to keep the ones that are helping minimize the error.

 in these ones,, these are not helping the performance a lot.

They get driven down first to zero.

If I keep going and I keep grinding out my land of penalty factor, more and more of the features are going to get driven to zero.

And by the time I get here, I only have a single feature left in my life.

Actually, it's actually zero...

And then we'll talk about this a second. But as you can see with Ridge they don't actually go to zero.

They go very small to zero. But in Lasso they actually go to zero.

 you can think of this as a feature selection method as., if you have eight features and I say I don't want eight features, I want to simplify this., but I don't know which of these features to remove., just run the lasso and, and,, figure out where the optimal lambda is., and you do that through cross-validation, by the way.,, and that'll tell you then which features should be removed.

 maybe it turns out the optimal value is here., and I've removed one, two, three, four, five, five of the features when I get there.. this is a map basically. You can think of it as a method of feature selection.., and we can control that by doing,, cross-validation where you'll run,, many different models,

each having a different lambda value, and you'll use cross validation to say which of those gives me the best performance.. It's example where,, since a lawsuit is being applied in all the features.

Because in this example it's up for all eight. Yes..

Typically it's for all it's used for all features. All features included... However many you have.. In this case we had eight.

 as always, includes all features. All.

 that is,, glass,. By adding, by taking our sum of square there and adding this penalty term here,

which is controlling the strength of it, is controlled by the lambda that we set., we can then minimize the cost function and use it as a feature selection tool, where it may cause certain features to be dropped out., ridge regression works a little bit differently.,, in Lambda,, sorry. And lasso, we use the sum of the absolute values of the coefficients in ridge.

We're using the sum of the,,, weight value squared..

And the way,, that this ends up working out is it pushes the,, coefficients or weights towards zero, but doesn't actually set them to zero.

 it just sets them very, very small. All. And now we'll come back to this.

Now you can look on the side., this is what happens with Lasso.

They go to zero with ridge regression.

As we crank up the penalty term, they get driven down close to zero, but not all the way to zero.

 ridge regression is not a feature selection method because it's not actually removing any features.

It's keeping them all, but it's setting the coefficients,, very close to zero as we crank up the penalty.

Let's take a look at the difference in behavior here.,, in terms of lasso versus range.

 suppose we have some,,, model and we've got for, for features in our model and we have a,

we come up with a first coefficient set coefficient set A, where we said the coefficients are weights for each of our features to two.. And we calculate the ridge penalty and we calculate the lasso penalty.. ridge would be the length of 16 lasso times eight.., and now we come up with two other potential candidate weight coefficient sets.. Coefficient set B has just a single,, feature left.

Three of the features have been set to zero, and we have one applied., we have one on the first feature and a coefficient set C where they're all set.

We keep all four features and the coefficients are set to one half.. If we calculate the ridge penalty it's actually the same.. if we're applying ridge regression Ridge says I don't I don't care which of these you use.

Use whichever one you want. They're both giving the same penalty term.

 use whichever of these two gives you the lowest error about a some square there., but if we look at the lasso penalty, lasso is penalizing coefficients at c more strongly than b.

 if coefficients at b and c lead to roughly similar levels of error,

 Lasso always tends to prefer sparse sets of coefficients or,,

dropping out or setting the zero coefficients of features that aren't are very useful., I try my best to put together a geometric explanation of that., I'm not going to walk. It's a little bit detailed.

And, honestly, it's not something you necessarily need to know.

But for those that are curious, I have a set of slides here that will walk you through a geometric perspective of what's going on with Lasso.,, as we add these penalty terms together and what's going on and then what the differences with Ridge.,, that I'll show you,, that.

Visually., why, Lasso tends to,, set coefficients is zero and Ridge doesn't set them to zero.

 if you're interested or you're curious about why this difference in behavior,, these slides are up on canvas.

Go through them,, walk through them.

Hopefully they're fairly explanatory, but if you have questions or something's not making sense to you,, let me know., we can talk about it., again, it's not going to test you on.

It's not critical that you really understand,, that.

But if you're curious,, I would go through those., final thing in the last two minutes or what,, we talked about the difference between Lasso and Ridge.

How they behave. Lasso is consider the feature selection approach.

Ridge is not,, determining the optimal lambda value.

 lambda is one of our hyper parameters, as we call them, or knobs that we can tune., and it controls that trade off between optimizing for, for performance or error minimizing error versus optimizing for minimizing complexity., we should find the optimal value of lambda, not by just saying, oh,

I think I'm going to use,, 0.3 or I'm going to use,,, point eight,, today., but we should evaluate a range of different values for lambda and use cross-validation,, to hone in on the optimal value for, for length.. what we would do is we'd run,, we take a big range for Lambda.

We create models using each of those lambda values.

We'd run all those models through cross-validation, and we'd find the one that gives us the,, the optimal,,,, performance.

 when I it,, the demo notebook will show you this,, in the,, in the GitHub,, you can take a look.

Will I generally advisor start with evaluating different orders of magnitude,, for lambda.

And then once you see it, the big picture,,

how it changes with the magnitude that running again and narrow in on that or that magnitude that run the range,

around that or the magnitude and, and then use that.

 I typically advise I do two passes, one big picture or the magnitude and then small and then second pass a smaller range.

 you'll see that you'll see that in code,, in, in the, demo notebook.

It depends on what we are optimizing for. Or if we're if we prefer a simpler and more interpretable model., we should go with Lasso., if we,,, don't care as much about interpretability.

We're optimizing more for performance. We might tend to go with Ridge., in particular, Ridge can tend to work better in cases where we have a high degree of collinearity between features.

 features are strongly correlated with each other., one of the dangers of Lasso is that,, if we have highly correlated features, the linear regression optimal,

training method doesn't know if you have feature A and B, and they're highly correlated.

You may end up with a case where the signs are very low way to a in a high way to be or a high way to a in a low way to be., and you might end up based on that taking out A or B if you're using lasso.

And it might turn out that actually having both of those has some value.

 that's the risk of Lasso because it is removing features. You might accidentally remove a feature that actually is useful.

 when in doubt, rage might be a better,, bet., two things to keep in mind., you need to scale your data before you start this process.,, if you have features that have different or there's a magnitude, you need to get them on the same order of magnitude for this to work.

 make sure that you scale your data. And then secondly, don't just randomly pick a lambda value.

You should you should be using,, a validation set of cross validation for,, trying to find the optimal lambda.. I think that wraps this up for today.

And we're on time.., I'll publish,,, assignment one results today.

 take a look at those., remember,, correction.

Corrected versions are due,, class next week., today I also publish the assignment, too, that'll be due in,, two weeks.

See everybody on Friday. I think this.,, it's,..

You're., this,, this is part of our discord., I wasn't here. I thought you were just playing.

I remember you should be,. I'm trying to find me.. Oh, I guess.., my dogs., I wanted to,... Not,, now, and just... Sorry, but what was the question was., I heard on top of the order that I happen to, even though it's going to take a while, I already have a plan.

I don't think this is going to go to waste.

 if I were the somebody who's got something to.

Say about this..

That's why. I'm talking.

 the next I don't I don't know, I just.

Feel it's,, slightly wrong.

 now it's my tax, which I.

And I was going to prefer if I was going to say if it turns out that's it, the entry points.

Let's go and say how much super nice this is showing you.

This is two classes going.
