[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
That's good. It's good. You.

If you think. About.

It. In that case, it's.

Us..

Good morning everybody. we are going.

To have a voice that I want to give everybody a chance to see the News Hour news feature I was last night.

And I finally did. Is. It's a neat feature., great attention for our program., today we're going to do we're going to,,.

Try a little bit of an experiment today. We're going to veer a little bit from our model that we followed the last three weeks.

And we're going to we're going to organize things a little bit differently in class,,

meaning that we're going to do a shorter lecture, and then we're going to do some,, some hands on stuff.

 I'm going to do a little, a quick code demo.

I know I said I wasn't going to do very many of those this semester, but,, I particularly this one.

I think it's just interesting and,, it's visual and it's not that hard to follow along.

 I'm going to walk through that., and then we're going to do a,, a little hands on,, activity, either individually or in pairs,,

which actually used to be,, part of the final exam for 5 to 510 class back when I used to teach it, it was my final exam.

 I hope it's not still being used as a as a final exam.

Otherwise, you're going to be in good shape by the time you get there at the end of the semester.

 I decided to take that and see if you guys can try to do it in 30 minutes today., that's what we're going to learn is we're going to work on,, today we're going to focus on,, time series.., taxes are really important.

An interesting topic that probably doesn't get enough attention in most,,... I think you might a little bit.

I understand from being a,. You've been talking a little bit about it., we can do a whole class on time series, and we've actually thought about doing that,, as an elective., there's a ton to learn there.,, but we haven't yet, and we're just going to do a shorter lesson on it today.

And I decided since there's, there's a lot of different approaches, lots of different types of,,

models that you can use for time series rather than try to attempt to teach,,

you all, all of those things where you're probably,, just gonna forget them anyway., but you can go and look them up., I decided to focus today's lecture just on the understanding, the intuition of how do we approach following a time series.

 we're not going to. We're not going to get in a lot of detail on specific algorithms that are used., but we're going to focus on just the intuition of what's different about a time series., we're gonna stick with very simple models.

Actually, we're just going to use a linear regression model. it builds on the lecture last week., but,, but I think it'll give you a good understanding of how to approach them.. that's what we're going to do today and we're going to do some practice with that., the quick look at the syllabus., here's where we are now in week four., hope everybody got their,,,, something one resubmission done,, this morning., assignment two is due,, next week.

 going for those who started on that. I started on it.

I think you have. I looked through it last night. I think you have everything you need to know for that one., it shouldn't be too bad., and next week, we're going to do a big, big lesson on classification.,,, we're going to pick up with logistic regression.

And we'll go through a couple of other algorithms,, next week, and then we'll get into two weeks of neural networks., in between are in the middle of our neural network., two weeks. Brant, we've got,, a couple of big items., the midterm and the project presentations., I've actually just. If this looks a little bit different to you, it's because it is., I just changed this,, a couple minutes ago.

I'm thinking I used to have this up to where. Where we'd have week seven.

We do our project presentations. We gave. We do the midterm. I'm thinking it makes sense to do it the other way around., for two reasons. One, if we do the midterm first,,

that means that everything we've been learning is a little bit fresher in your head

versus waiting an extra a gap week and then having to go through the midterm., and number two, that also gets you an extra week on the project, which I think will be beneficial to you., versus we do the other way around.

We're compressing the project into just three weeks, and then you've got an extra blank week,, before the midterm.,, unless you all really feel strongly about wanting to do the mid the projects presentations first,

I think that this is probably more logical., we'll do that.

I'm going to talk. We're going to introduce the project today. we'll go through our, our,, few slides.

We'll do our hands on activity, and then we'll find a little bit of time kicking off our project today.,, that will be a botched,, today I'll talk about the midterm when we get there, and I introduce the first class.

It's not something to be,, too stressed about., and then next week, we're going to kick off our Kaggle competition.

 we've got some time. Let's do week 11, but we'll kick it off next week,, as part of our,., as part of our lecture next week... All.

 we're going to,, number five for them., we're going to we're going to,, this is,, round two of our knowledge checks today., I was up way too late last night working on some improvements for you.,, in,, what's now,, called class wise.,, a few changes before. Before you open it, a few changes you'll notice today,, the format is largely the same,

 I've tried to cut it down three questions today, we'll see how that goes instead of five., we,, when you,, put in the link that I've shared through,,

the canvas announcements, you'll be prompted to log in with the Duke single sign on.,, your login,, with your two credentials,, which you'll map to your,

to your,,, your identity,, you'll go through the quiz., we, I change the. I felt last week we were getting too hung up on., I felt we were getting a little too hung up on the points.

And that's really not the. That's really not the objective here., I've changed the, the feedback system to a thumbs up or a thumbs down.. behind the scenes there's some stuff going on with points and on,, to help,, this a bit more of a rubric approach,

but,, you guys are going to see a thumbs up, thumbs down,,, for each question.

 hopefully you see a lot of thumbs up and not, not a lot thumbs down.,,, but, and then I've also made some adjustments to the feedback to try to be make the feedback a little bit more useful.

 the important thing as you go through this is not actually much the thumbs up, thumbs down.

It's more about the feedback that you're getting on your answer.

 the model is going to attempt to try to,,

bring out any points that you might have missed or correct anything that you've maybe incorrectly stated in your response.,, after you submit these questions, you'll get a again, a thumbs up, thumbs down.

But you also get a little short paragraph of some feedback on your answer., and then below that, you have the a model answer that shows you here.

And here's what you really get. Remember feedback., for now you might copy paste it., that's one of the things I haven't gotten to.

 there's a few things I haven't gotten to yet., one of them is,,, giving you a way to log in and view your past quizzes and feedback.

 if you want it, you might want to copy it out now., I'm working and hopefully by next week we'll have a log in that you can go back to your old ones.,. if you think a few items on my list I haven't gotten to., that's one of them., another one I forgot.

Somebody mentioned this last class. I do,, want to continue to think about ways to,, make the questioning a bit more conversational in nature.

 you're not feeling it's one big question that you have to answer.

And then another big question that you have to answer., some of these questions that you'll see today are pretty big,,

 it's going to take for maybe 3 or 4 sentences, and maybe it has a couple of different parts that you have to address., ideally I'd to try to break it up a little bit.

 you're dealing with smaller questions at a time.

 you have one small piece, and then you have another piece that, it comes after., that's going to be I got to think about how, how I want to do that.

But that's, that's another item I'd to try to,. Try to improve on... What else those are.

I think probably the two big things that I have on my list that I want to try to work on.

I do want to make a self-service version of this for you also, you can go and log in and just study on your own., if you want...

 I think those are the changes that you'll see or it's adaption.

I think you also, adjust that., I think that's I think those are the changes from today.

 before we jump in our knowledge check any questions.

Two thumbs up, at least., I think you're aiming for three thumbs up..,, I decided for the grading because we're doing a lot of experimenting.,, we're just. As long as it's complete, we'll count it,, for credit.

But,, you should really be aiming for three, three and three thumbs up., I hope for everybody., I can obviously, I have a dashboard view.

I can see how everybody's doing. And I'm not going to be very happy about if I see all thumbs down.,,, let's aim for three and three thumbs up.

But I think,.., really, I think you should.

We should be straight. What take a poll how we do after afterwards and see how folks did.

But I'm hoping that we have a lot of three and three. And are still going with the ten minute time limit., it's not a hard time limit. that's a it's a,, suggested time,, based on the questions, but it's not a hard limit,.

 take your time., I'm gonna I'm going to roughly shoot for 15 minutes, I think, to try to wrap it up and move on.,, if you shoot for about ten minutes or, I know some folks are taking a little bit longer that of type out.,, we're going to roughly shoot for trying to move on the lecture, but by,, by 9:00.

I sent the link out by,, the canvas announcement.

I'll put it up here as. Oh, we do have a domain now to make it a little bit easier.

 we're going to work on that on the identifiers for the quizzes.

 you don't have to type all this in.

But, you can just click on the link and you're in your email that you should receive as I know it classifies that work.

All. Good luck everybody. Only.

My. Here.

If you. I.

Raise your hand if you're still working.. All.

We'll give it a few more minutes.. On Monday.

And. And., 300, three days. Two out of three days.,, that's probably for 2 to 0.., most people, I guess 303, 303.

Thumbs up. Thumbs down was,, better than,, worrying about points on things.,, I don't, I don't I get as many questions about why I get a wire into this.,, I just had a question. More,.

 from last week. But the independent assumption or the non collinearity is that they hard assumption

or this a soft assumption that you can fix with Lasso I guess or the other... Good. Good question.,, none of them are hard assumptions.,,,, we talked about the different assumptions last week.

I don't think you,, I'm sure you could construct a case where you don't violate any of those assumptions,

but for the most part, you're always going to be evaluating at least one of those assumptions.., the point of the of even talking about the assumptions, again,

with linear regression is not a you can't use linear regression and you need to switch to something else., it just means that if you understand which ones you're by, first of all, if you understand how many you're violating,

it gives you a sense of whether linear aggression may be a good fit or not as good a fit., number two, if you understand which ones you're violating, it helps you understand what to do about it.,,. when you asked about, for example, by the,,, independence of features,,,

there are if, if we decide we violated that one,, there's a couple of things we could do.

One is we could just do nothing and we could just leave it., and again, if we if we all we really care about performance, that's probably fine., if we care about interpretability, that's going to create a problem because it's going to mess with the coefficients or the weight values., do try that because it's a good example of how taking out,

correlated features can drastically change the coefficients or weights of the features that are remaining.

In fact, it can even flip it from negative to positive,, relationship.

 if you care about the relationships and understanding them and interpreting the model,, if you have highly correlated features in there,

it's going to create problems for interpretability actually can lead you to,, a false interpretation of what's happening., and you see that case with a fuel efficiency example that leads us to a false conclusion.,,,,.

 that's the point of the assumptions is if you understand which ones you're violating severely,, you can think about what to do with it.

Maybe you need to add polynomial features. Maybe you need to use a log transformation., maybe you,, need to remove some features, maybe use a lasso to take out some features,, etc. in question... Not as much., good., there were pretty big questions, I know that.. The only thing I might comment on is they're, the third one was significantly shorter.. And,, I into the mode of, oh, I would read a lot of and write a lot and then there's that.

I don't know if there's an indication of the point value of this one to give the reviewer a shorter answer for that one other than.. And,, that's an interesting that you caught that because,,

 the way this works, I think I told you on the back end is I upload my lecture size,

it generates the quite I tell how many questions it generated that generates questions for me., last night, very late last night when I generated that,,

the third question was actually also quite long, and I decided to be a little bit kind to you.

And,, I actually have a question three manually,, that you didn't have to write quite as much., that's why three of the., the generator is probably about the same.

Did you feel they were big question that a lot of one question there... All. Good... By the way, this is,. If you can't tell, this is a fun process for me to go through., it's very,, as you, as you all get into starting to build things and build products.,,, if we think about what we've been through far, we started off last week,

I spent about it's about 30 minutes,, with some help from I building what we did last week.

I had some security issues, and,,, I had some issues with the grading, etc.,

but it's good enough that it gave you all a sense of, what we're trying to do is really get feedback on that., this week we spent a little more time and we've got a little bit,, a better version this week., and now we got some more feedback and we'll go back and we'll, we'll do another version for the next week.

 very similar to, I think, building a product,, where, the best way to do it is really to just do it in an iterative way,

rather than spending three weeks trying to build the perfect system and show it to you guys,, spending a little bit of time,,,

to build something that you can use and that can get in your hands and you can start to give me feedback on it is better., if I had shown up last week and said, hey, I'm thinking about building this thing,

they ask you questions and then you respond and it gives you some feedback., I probably wouldn't have gotten as good of feedback from you as, as,,

as we did have a you be, use something, even if it wasn't very good., and I think a lot of people ask when we talk about building products, you have an idea., and,, my answer is always, just build it, but build it quickly.,, if it takes you more than a week to build it, you're spending too long.,, build the simplest possible thing very, very quickly and then show it to people and get some feedback.

it's just this idea that you're trying to verbally describe to them,,, their idea of what,, if you describe your product idea to them,

they may have some vision in their head that's totally different than what you have in your head.

 if you can get something actual physical on, on the computer or whatever to,

for people that react to it tends to,, give you a lot more valuable feedback., but you don't want to spend too long doing it because your, your first version of it's probably going to be,, bad., and it may be completely off the mark to the point where you decide the idea is actually not any good anyway.

And,, there's no sense in spending weeks or months working on that just to find out that it's actually really pretty bad.

I should just scratch it, go do something else. Or that version was terrible.

 I need to just restart and do it all over again. Then you've just wasted a month,, doing that.

And,, as engineers, we building stuff. it's really up to us to say, I've got this great idea.

Let me just go take a month and just work on this thing and make it really,

really cool before I show anybody,,, that they're going to it when I show it to them.

We don't we don't negative feedback. We don't when,,, we show something to somebody and it's underwhelming.

It's not it's not that great. And,, we know that.

And,, they say that, and that is painful.,, it's a something you have to train.

And I'm not great at that either. I get better with time about that, but I don't.

I have a meeting this afternoon with somebody that I'm going to show something that I'm not.. I think is actually not very good.

And I'm not excited about the meeting because I think the feedback is not going to be very good, but it's still going to be valuable., as much as I don't really want to do the meeting,,, I do it and get some probably harsh feedback., and but that's still going to be really useful.,,,,.

Anyway, the point is, if you are thinking about a side project or a new venture or something that,, I would my suggestion would be,, it's good to talk to people about the idea just to get some input, but don't spend a lot of time talking to people.

It's easy to build things now. You could go spend a day or a weekend or something, and you could build something pretty decent., and then you could show people and get their reaction to it.

And,, and then they'll give you a lot of input, a lot of useful input.

Then you'll go and you'll change it., and then you can do another round and show people again., that iterative development and getting feedback along the way can be, can be really, really, really good., that's the process where I'm trying to model for, for you all as we go through this..., I think we talked enough about that.,, before we do get into our lecture two, I want to mention also,, seminar this week.,, everybody enjoy,, Neal's talk last week.,. That's great., this week,, we're switching gears a little bit., I'm still in the same vein. we got,, colleague Dan there.

Danny that's coming this,, Friday,, to visit us., he works in the,, what do called the Office of Translation and Commercialization.

 it's a group at Duke that's responsible for,, helping faculty generate helping faculty commercialize any intellectual property.,, they don't really deal with students unless it's,, something that students build as part of,, funded research.

 if you, go build something on your own time and you want to start a company around it.

Duke doesn't really have anything to do with that because that's your own thing., but if you're working in a research lab on campus and you,, build something really cool as part of your job there,

and you decide you want to start a company around it,, that's when Duke gets involved.

Because technically, Duke owns the intellectual property. And behind that,, meaning that you can't just go,, start a company and sell things.

You have to get the agreement from Duke to be able to do that.. And, and then same thing applies to faculty,.

Who are funded by,,, any grant funding to go and do things., this group, I think, works with those faculty and, and students at times to,,

either try to license or sell technology that they build tech companies or they try to help them start up companies,

depending on whatever they're interested in doing., and that's an expert in all of that., and in particular, he's going to talk about intellectual property as it relates to software and AI,

because that it is quite a bit different in our area versus in biotech or something that,

where you're probably if you invent something, you're going to go get a patent on it,

and then you have some tangible intellectual property that you can go sell., with I it's pretty rare to go try to patent things.

It can be can be done, but it's not very common., it's more of just what we call it, a trade secret.

I have some special,,, knowhow that I've developed by doing something that nobody else knows how to do.

And,, and I want to turn that into some a product or commercialize that somehow,, it gets a little much less clear.

And the model builds, is that my intellectual property or does that belong to., there's lots of interesting questions. that's gonna come with all your questions about intellectual property.

Da. Danny.. Da. And I, it should be in the canvas side, too, for,, for 501., I haven't published the full list of speakers yet. I'm still working on that. But,, I know,, that's up there.,. that should be really interesting., really interesting talks.

All. Let's,, get into our short lecture here on time series.

All. That's supposed to be animated, but,.,.

 if we everybody generally understands what, what a time series is, it's a, a set of data points which are over there in some time.

 they're,, spaced out at some intervals in time., hopefully they're equal intervals in time., it's not always guaranteed that they're going to be equal intervals of time.

Sometimes they're not. But,, I chronologically have some logical ordering in time.,, there are other types of,, data that also can be chronologically or other than time.

As you progress through your lifetime, you accumulate,,

you have different medical records from visits to the doctor,, medicines that you've had, etc.,., on the other hand, if we think about the data coming from,, anything that's measuring data at a three year interval.

 the stock price of a certain stock,, is generally measured with a certain time frequency., the,, trend of users,, to a website could be consider that a time series.

 there's lots of things in the world that,, we,, that we model as a time series., the main difference is that,, when we build models in machine learning,

we have a fundamental,, assumption that the observations are not correlated with each other,

that the observations in XY points in our, in our data set are independent of each other, independent observations.., but in time series, that's generally not true., the, typically the, the present is correlated with the past in some way.. what happened is,, the temperature now is highly correlated with the temperature of five minutes.

And I just can't change all that much in the period of five minutes., might maybe it's also correlated with the temperature yesterday or,, the temperature this day last year,, whatever., that changes the approach to modeling them., it actually gives us a lot more useful information than we might otherwise have if we were treating those points as independent points.. Because we can take advantage of that correlation., that's useful information that we can integrate into our model itself., and there are different ways to do that. We can we can convert that information into features in some way., and, or we could use or the specialized models which account for some of that correlation., there are lots of different time series models out there.

We're not really going to go into any of them today.,, but if you're interested.,, there's, there's,, lots of different approaches you can do, I think., we're gonna, as I mentioned, we're gonna talk about the intuition behind how do we how do we,, approach modeling time series.

All.,., here's where we start.

 you can break the time series down into two key components., one is what we call the trend, and then the other is what we call the seasonality.

 the trend is, as the name would suggest, is just the long term trend of what's what's happening.

 if you look at a series of data over a longer time horizon.

It's it's going down.. But if we look at any individual,, small or a time period here,,, as the years progressed.., as a client, as the,, seasons change during the year, we're going to see the mass,, go up and down a little bit.. we could actually just look at this chart and we could say, this is the trend.

And then there are some,, seasonal,, up or down each year.., and generally we could do that with any time series.

We can break that into two major components a trend and,, seasonality., we might have it on even a weekly basis, we might have it on an annual basis, etc..,. I just mentioned that if we think about things,, temperature., as the day heats up into the afternoon and starts cooling down at night.

You may have it on,, an annual basis, maybe as the seasons change., as the,,, in the summertime, when the day heats up and everybody's air conditioning turns on,

the power demand is going to go up as the night closed off and might come back down.

Maybe it's a weekly fluctuation, maybe during,,,., I don't know, maybe during the work week,,, it ends up being higher because you've got people in offices, people in factories, etc., higher power demand in the weekend., we talked about bookstore sales, I think in the first class,. We'd expect some seasonality in retail sales, etc.

 the key to,, modeling the A time series,, is understanding what the seasonality components are,, and being able to account for those in the model... There are different approaches to figuring out that seasonality.

One way is to just use our human judgment or subject matter expertise if we're modeling power demand, for example.., we might,, it might be a good idea to talk to experts who,,

have worked at a utility that did,, understand demand curves and what drives them., and get their input into what,, what influences power demand..,, if we're talking to somebody in retail or if we're doing something retail,

obviously talking to somebody who has some expertise in retail sales and how they which would be useful.

We can also let the data show us that., if we have enough historical data, we can also just,, find that talent covered.,, seasonality., this is one way to do that., and when we do this, we call it time series decomposition.. we can take a,, time series that we can decompose it into,, really three pieces.

One is the long term trend. Two is,, a seasonality factor, and three is just the, the extra what's left over.

 the error or the residuals component to it..

And this is an example. We're going to we're going to walk through this a little bit later.

But this is,, over the course of a month, this is showing the,, count of total flights,, in the US.

And you can see here that it has a slight downward trend if you look carefully over the course of that month., and actually, if you look at the trend, you can see it's picked that out., you can, also it also clearly has a seasonality component to it,, which appears to be on a weekly basis.

And,, we can actually extract the trend that we can extract the seasonality component here.

And, the combination of these two is not going to perfectly model that.

 we have some left over an error that we then add to it.., and now we can combine these three elements,, trend seasonality and the error in one of two ways., the simplest and probably most common way is what we call an additive model, where we just simply add them together.

 we say that the,, the Y is equal to the trend factor plus the seasonality plus some residual.. And we create a simple model that looks that., the alternative way would be to multiply them together.

 the Y is equal to the trend multiplied by the seasonality,, multiplied by some residual factor., I'll show you what. We'll dive into these two in just a second., one important thing to do if you're going to,, use data to uncover the seasonality in something,,

one important and you're going to use an automated,, package this,, I think this is done by stats model.,, it's really important to look carefully at the,,, at the magnitude,, on the y axis of these things.., the magnitude of that change is small compared to the seasonal component of it,.

Which is going from positive 1000, -3000.., in this case, the seasonality factor is actually,, very significant relative to the overall trend in the data.

Another common issue can be that, you'll do something this and you'll get a seasonality,

and it looks there's a very clear seasonality to it.

But then if you look closely at the magnitude of the axis here, compare it to the,, to the axis on the residuals,

you'll see that the residuals are actually much higher than the seasonality component.

 that's actually a case where either there's there is some seasonality, but it's very faint.

It's not, it's not, strong., or there really is no seasonality, but the model is just inventing one.,, but it turns out that the residuals are actually much higher than the seasonality component.

The model is actually showing., it's not really seasonal at all.

This one is seasonal,. Because if you look at the delta here versus on the residuals, you can see this is pretty strong., but sometimes these are, these are reversed..

And we do we typically do it in one of two ways. One is the additive model or the multiplicative model., the additive model is,, the simplest way to think about it is,,

if the,, trends,, does not have an impact on the seasonality.

 the seasonality is constant regardless of the trend.

We have a trend up, and we have a very clear and consistent seasonality over the course of time., on the other hand, if we have data and it looks this,, we have we also have a trend up.

We also have seasonality. But we can see that the seasonality is actually growing,.

It's getting more seasonal over time. the trend is causing an increase in the seasonality.. If you look at the peaks and valleys over there compared to over here, they're very small now.

And if we see something that, that's a good indication that a,,, multiplicative model may be a better fit than an additive model.. that's a, that's a key difference., again, when the seasonality is more or less constant over time,, and as a model is generally the way to go if the seasonality is,, changing, increasing or decreasing, over time, then a multiplicative model.

All.,, I think we talked about everything on here,, how they do this., there are some different packages. The one we're going to use today is from stats model., to do a decomposition..

Is understanding the,. Time series, decomposition, time and breakdown.

or why all the terms are multiplied that have added in this final in this one.,. ignore the residual component for a minute.

That's just that accounting for the fact that this is not going to be perfect, that there's going to be some herds are.

Just look at it. Consider the trend in the season. All.,, we have a trend factor in the seasonality factor., in the first one, it's clear we just take our trend,, which would be a linear upward trend.

And we just add the seasonality component for whatever,,, wherever we are within that year, do it.., but if we try to model this one the same way,,,

it's not going to work very because we're going to over estimate the seasonality here.. It's going to overestimate the seasonality here., if we have constant seasonality. But then when we get over here, it's going to underestimate the seasonality.

 it's not going to capture, these peaks and valleys here.

 it's it's using an average seasonality over time. It's going to create something that looks very much that., and that's not going to model this very.., we can multiply them together, which means that we allow this seasonality contribution,,,, to grow,, with the trend.., as, if the trend is going up or down,, and that's going to actually grow the seasonality contribution to the,, to the Y.. All., let's.

 that's part one,, is understanding how to decompose these and how to think about trend versus seasonality., and how I combine those to form a model,, of a time series., we're gonna switch over to part two, which is,, that's called autocorrelation.,, I mentioned before that,, that the unique thing about time series data versus regular data modeling is that correlation with the past.. And we call this, autocorrelation.. it's correlation of, of the present with a delayed or lag copy of itself., we could think of this,, again, the simplest way to think about it is, is in weather..,, the temperature at 2 p.m. today is probably somewhat correlated with the temperature at 2 p.m. yesterday,

and it's probably somewhat correlated with the temperature at 2 p.m. on September.. we understand that there is some correlation, but it's not correlation to all data points in the past.

It's only correlation to certain data points in the past based on the seasonality of the time series., we can again, we can use our human judgment, our subject matter expertise to,, identify these potential correlations.. We could just sit down.

We can think about it for whether it's maybe fairly straight forward for retail, something maybe retail sales.

It might also be somewhat straightforward. We could probably take a reasonable guess at where the correlations might be., for other time series data. It's not obvious,, even to an expert in the area might not be obvious.

And,, we can apply statistical test to look at correlation of the present with the past.,, what we're doing with this statistical test is just simply looking at how

correlated is the present data point with any of the past data points that we have.. And if we see that there's a strong correlation with certain data points in the past, then we can take advantage of that of that correlation.., and obviously this is closely, very closely tied with the idea of seasonality.. If we understand the seasonality, then we can logically identify the auto correlation., we will typically look at correlation., and if you this,., where, this is the present.. The point.. And it's perfectly correlate with itself. Logical., there's, actually a slight correlation with yesterday, but not, not very strong, but actually,

it turns out there's a significant correlation with,,, a lag of seven days, meaning with that, with that day one week ago.. And also we see another fairly significant correlation with that day two weeks ago.. there seems to be a,, a weekly seasonality to this.

Since we have these values, we can use those values as input features in our model to predict the present.

 we can use what happened one week ago.

And we can use what happened two weeks ago as input features to make a prediction of what today is going.. It's just the,, the directionality of the correlation.. meaning that if, and, meaning that this is a positive correlation.

 if, if this were,,, let's say retail sales or something,, this would say that,,,

it as it's going to be positively correlated, meaning that if retail sales seven days ago were high, today is going to be high.

Two if it were negatively correlated, it would be the opposite,

meaning that if retail sales one week ago were high, we can expect the sales today to be lower.. And that would be the negative. either way, that means that as long as there's as long as it's on the extreme of other axis, that's.. Either way is good.. Either you have either strong positive or a strong negative is good because

that gives us a signal or something for useful information that we can use.. good question. we're looking for a strong positive or negative correlation.. And the trick., the trick here, by the way, is differentiating.. What's strong versus what's weak.. Because we actually see we see correlation to all,, all of these.. To some degree., it's our job now to think about what which ones are real versus which ones are just noise.

But some of them are less obvious, there's some correlation to what happened two days ago.

Negative correlation. Is that a real signal or is that just some noise that occurred, some randomness that occurred in the data..,, this one is probably real.

 it would be logical. And this one is, questionable in terms of the magnitude.

But we look and say it's 14 days two weeks. if we have correlation that's seven days.

It's also logical to think we'd have correlation at 14 days on a weekly basis., even when you do something this, there's still going to be a component of,,

just using your own judgment,, and trying to decide what's real versus what's randomness., that's a good question. That is.

Some a confidence interval. I have to go back through the documentation and stats model, but I think it's a it's a I don't know.

And I remember what the confidence interval was,

some confidence interval that helps you make that decision of what's statistically significant correlation versus what's.., we can go back and look in the documentation to see how that's calculated.

Exactly. But that's an attempt to,, bring a little bit more statistics in to show you, what might be significant versus what.

All., autocorrelation is also linked to,., we can test back to what we call a Markov process. look for the Markov processes once you explain it...., it is, but not ready to explain.

Markov Chain starts off with looking,, at the context just before said form.

What I would, what needs to be fed into it.

 you start off with a one and that's everything immediately before feeds in and it correlates.

And then you decrease that if you can have, in this case,,

at that seven week interval, what percentage of this weight do we want to pull in.

You can do that contextually looking back in the time series all the way back seven.

You might want to pull in 50% of that trend from seven days ago.

And it's providing context I think can also provide context., and that's this bidirectional context... That's a good that's a good description.,,,.

Typically we consider a Markov process to be,, if we think about,, some process and we're trying to model that as,,, full auto correlation with,, the data point with a lag of one, meaning whatever happened last,, we have,, full correlation with,,, with the presence,,, and,, or put another way,

the current state depends only on the, the previous what happened at the previous timestamp., and this is,, sometimes true, but often not exactly true, but it still can be useful for modeling purposes.,, the most common example you see, given a Markov process would be,, if you're trying to model the weather condition.

That,, the weather condition today we're going to model in is depending only on what the condition was yesterday., and there's some,, there's what we call a transition matrix that specifies the probabilities of,, shifting between the states.

 if yesterday was,, sunny, then,, we're going to take that information and we're going to say,, based on that,

there's a 70% chance that today is going to be sunny and there's a 30 a 20% chance it's going to be cloudy and a 10% chance it's going to be rain.. And then based on that,, we can run., we can we can,, model out what today is going to be, and then we can use today's and we can go to the next step and say,

And we can we can keep modeling that.,,, this is a,, not,, it's a, it's a model that's not often correct, but still is useful for modeling things this., and you'll see models that use a Markov process approach,, in lots of different places, in different areas of science., some people use it for predicting equity prices,, etc.,, we're not gonna spend a lot of time on I just want to introduce it to you.

 if you hear it and if you see it, you know what it is.

And,, again, it ties back to or autocorrelation, meaning that we're using full autocorrelation with a lag of one.

 we're not looking at anything else in the past besides what the last data point was.

In this case it for modeling the weather. The only thing we were looking at is what happened yesterday.

We're now looking at two days ago, three days ago, one week ago, one year ago.

We're discarding all that information. We're only looking at what happened yesterday and trying to transition out., obviously, because if we identify,,, autocorrelation, we can use that information and build features out of that,, for a model.

If we do that,, we create what's called an auto regressive,, model.

We can say they're auto aggressive,

meaning they're considering what's the sequence of tokens or words that have been previously generated in now generating the next.. to make this a little bit more,, real for you,, I'm going to walk through a quick demo,

then we'll take our break, and then we'll have you all work on a little exercise, and then we'll we'll start the process.. This is in the repo as. we're going to work with a,, a flight data set.

You can download it from,,, a Google, bucket here., and this is the set, I think it's the month of August, something either 20th October 2019, August 2019.

 it's a CSV file containing all of the flights that occurred in the US during the month of August.

And there's actually a lot of interesting things you can do with it., if anybody's curious about it., you can build some cool things, you can build a network map showing how the different airports in the

U.S are connected based on the number of flights going between different airports.

And,, and then you can do some graph analysis on that.

And, it's cool stuff, but, we're going to do something very simple with it today,

which is we're just going to look at the, the,,, the time series of, the total number of flights occurring each day.. we're going to we're going to do take a very aggregated view of that., we've got this is what the data looks., for each day we've got, a list of here's all the different flights, the carrier, the er, what airport it was coming from,

when it was going to, when the departed, whether it's delayed, whether the weather had any impact on it or not, etc.

It doesn't matter. How big is this. And if I think about it,,, we've got a bunch of different features.

We don't need all this data.

The only thing we really need is just to get an aggregate count of how many flights per day for what we're trying to do here., we're going to do that and we're going to visualize our data.

And it looks very much a slide we just showed here's the month of August and here's the total count of flights per day.. we could look at this and we can immediately see a couple of things with this.

By the way, this is also why it's good to visualize your data., just creating a simple visual this helps us quickly understand a few things.

One is there's,, it looks perhaps a slight.

Not,, it's not that obvious, but maybe a slight downward trend over the course of the month.

And then number two, there is some strong seasonality.

It looks,,, throughout the course of the month., in particular, we have it,, it looks here even these patterns up here seem to be fairly consistent,, week over week.

All. we're going to,, do some time series decomposition on it using,, stats model., and we can run this,, stats statsmodels seasonal decompose., we have to,, for then our,, estimate of the,, seasonality.

And in this case, we're going to ask it to look at a, decompose it using a seasonality of seven.

 period equals seven. Why. seven days., it looks if we look at this, we would say that this appears to be a weekly,, seasonality occurring every seven days.. we're going to,, try to model out this,, as a,, additive model combining a trend and a weekly seven day seasonality.

And this is what it shows us. And we can look here and see, yes, there is a slight downward trend.. It probably looks more significant here than this. But if you look at the axis here you would say that it's slight., there's a fairly strong seasonality component., with a at seven day cycles and, the residuals, the errors are not that big,, relative to the seasonality.

 this is actually we can actually model this pretty by combining the trend and seasonality with,, reasonable error., now let's,, try to model it. the first thing we're going to do is model it just as a function of the trend.

 we're going to ignore seasonality for the moment.

And we're going to build a simple linear regression model that just models it as a trend over time.

 to model there's a trend. We need some feature. Which is a function of time passed.

And what we're going to do is just convert our dates into a simple count of days passed.. day zero, then one, two, three, four, five, etc.

And we're going to build a simple a simple linear regression, meaning,, just one feature,.

Which is the days passed., and we're going to model the light count as a function of days passed.

And if we do that,, and we can calculate the,, the MSE, r squared, etc., we're going to get a model that.

Looks this. The other., this is our job.., it's not doing bad, actually, for a lot of those, but it's completely missing these,

these,, particular days of the week where the flights just dropped. I'm not sure what days.

It should be interesting to check what data we have., let's now take another attempt at it, and let's model it just as a function of seasonality.

 let's ignore the trend for the moment and let's try to capture the seasonality of it.. And the seasonality was a seven day cycle.. what we want to do is to capture the seasonality in this cases, add a feature which indicates,, day of the week..,, you can do this at different time scales.

 you could do this at,, hour of the day, month of the year,, etc., but this for this one, we saw that we had a clear weekly seasonality to it.

0 to 6. And we just,, we just add a either true or false,,

depending on whether that particular day was day zero of the week, day one of the week to each other.. for those that have seen this before, this is what we call one hot encoding., have you talked about that five times..

 you always want to. this is what we're doing with one encoding.

 a feature for day of the week. we end up with seven features in our model, each feature representing,, a specific day of.. And then we build a model. And our model looks this now.

And we got seven features. And each feature has a weight. And it's a it's a multiple linear regression model with seven features.

And, if we visualize what the model predicts, this is not bad.. We're we're getting close. Certainly closer than what our trend to follow is doing., but down here, we're undershooting this., because we're not including that trans component. We're just including the seasonal component.

 let's do it one more time. And let's combine both ideas. And we're going to model it now including both the trend and the seasonality.

 how do we do that. We would include our seasonality from the one hot encoded features.

 we'd have seven one hot encoded features for each day of the week.

And then we'd add our trend feature which is just the number of days passed.., we're doing a much better job.

Still not quite perfect, but a better job at fitting to this data.., and the other point I want to make, too is that,.

We did all this with a linear regression model. most people think linear regression is.

But,, we just did this with a linear regression model.,. We fit a fairly complex Catherine,, using just linear regression.

 that I think is illustrative of,,

the fact that a lot of times the data and the features that you use matter a lot more than the choice of algorithm that you use.

If we had not been smart and we had just use the trend component or something, yes, it would have been terrible., would have been way too simple. But because we were smart in how we created the features, we could model this pretty., yes. powerful models,, using,, a neural network based model, an Lstm or a transformer model or something that., that could be easier in the sense that,, we don't have to exhaust as much energy creating the features.

We could just throw the data at it and let it figure it out., but we can accomplish almost the same thing,, this way.

And the advantage of doing this is now we have a highly interpretable model.

We can easily take a look at our model and understand how it's reaching its conclusions, understand what's driving the conclusions.

Whereas if we had just thrown this data at an Lstm or something, we really wouldn't have any idea what's driving the conclusions.

We might have good predictions, but we wouldn't know where those coming from.,. We might not recognize that season,, the weekly seasonality, for example.. that's the advantage of going with a simpler model, but maybe doing some extra work,, and creating features.

All. We're going to do this. We're now going to model this. Ah,, a second way using the auto correlation approach.. the second half of what we just talked about., we're going to run,, and I think this is the same as what's on the slide.

We're going to run,, and autocorrelation plot here.

And we can again see that weekly seasonality show up., and we're going to build a,,, an auto correlation model,, using,., correlation with a lag of seven, meaning just using the,, the data from seven days ago.., and when we do that,, we could,, we can see that,,,, sorry.

First we're going to do it with an autocorrelation of one..

 if we just predict the,, current, this place is a function of yesterday's points.., we can see here I've said days lag is equal to one., I've built an autocorrelation model using a single feature which is count of flights yesterday.

 treating this as a Markov process. And we can see that's really not doing a good job at all of fitting this step., let's do it again. And this time we're going to do,, lag of seven days.

Now we've done a much better job fitting itself to the.., I'm not going to go through this. This notebook is in the,,, is in the repo.

If anybody's interested, there's an optional section here. There's a,, an open source package called prophet.

I use prophet before. It's a nice time series.

It was originally built by Facebook. I don't know if they still maintain it.

Not, I guess I should say,, I'm not sure it still maintains it or they've they've,.

Put it out into the community now to support,, but,, profits,, fairly powerful,, time series modeling thing., you can go through this on your own. You can do,,, decomposition., you can build a model that looks this,, and you can essentially do the same thing that we just did manually.

It's just a little bit more automated,, to,, to get there you can go through that.,, my contact point. All. We're going to,, take our break and then,, get back from a break.

I'm going to have you all take a shot at,, very similar, similar type of problem.

We'll,, restart the exercise..

40. Nine..005000., but,, because you expect,, obviously I think the model is such that everything is evenly spread out in the residual., the reality is the residual doesn't., it doesn't really matter.

And you can also just separate out as I can., when you're doing a modeling, you're not actually more.

Likely that you're going to build a model using the trend of the AI model is not going to work., I was I just remember,, that was, now that makes sense.. you can think about whichever way is going to work, logic on it. But when you build a model that you're going to hear about., here and the question that was part of the,, the seminar... You have to miss..,.

Thanks for heads up.. Just got as. I think after that, I'll be there.. That's good. Thanks for that., I was thinking about,, I've been looking at,, it transforms,, the context of time series., as opposed to,, the. Proceed the steps you can approach,, before you transform.

Or other, more powerful sequence based models the., or even the Transformers is really a sequence model.,, they can often do a, I'd say probably a better job of capturing,,

complex patterns over time series where you have multiple types of seasonality in the data, and it's not obvious what those are up upfront.

And you may just want to throw your data at a model that and have it figure it out.

 we knew this was actually monthly.

And we can just require.. Either.

 the effect we're learning today is,, really you'd probably prefer that either where,

and ahead of time you can just use some subject matter expertise or something.. Judgment., or it's relatively straightforward to identify it from visualizing that, that... you can visualize and you can clearly see anomalies now.. Even if it's not obvious.,, for equities grazing, for example, it's probably not obvious that there's a clear seasonal component to it.

 in that case, what we're doing today.

You could try it, but you'd be guessing at what this seasonality is and how many of them there are and what the lags are., and it's you're probably going to struggle with trying to do that.

And that's a case where it maybe you maybe better just throw in your dad and.

Then,, just pick it out.. You should pick... Things think about take it to the extreme.

You can think about a transformer model,. That's inherently what it does is it just picks up patterns and things.

 for us as humans would be hard to identify or,, in Texas, we do identify that,.. We don't think of it that way.. even language,.

It's a pattern, but it's not obvious what the rules of it are., to us as humans.. And, and it would be extremely hard to try to follow as a set of rules..,,, if you see,,, in a sentence,, then two words later, we should probably have a or whatever., trying to do that approach, using what we're doing now is never work.

 you need you need something a license.., it's the Kaggle competition that we're doing is that time series.

But,, and really there's a time component, but it's not really going to be capture time.... Interesting.. You keep that... That'll be a little bit different... Project will be time's up for this upcoming.

Yes. Thank you. Sure.

Oh I think. Is I don't know.. Hi.., seasonality between these that you might be seeing the model or maybe you understand.. in this case of cherry, the way you want to determine that is if you look at the magnitude of this axis compared to the similar.

But if we can see this one here ranges from -3000 to positive thousand.

 it's a,, it's a 4000 difference between 11.

Whereas here we're ranging from 100 to 200. it's really interesting 500 because.

 in this case the you have the seasonality magnitude.

 4000 -4000 is much higher.

Is the residual clustering... we conclude that this is a fairly strong seasonal component.

Now imagine that these this one went from -300 to 200.

This one we would see the same pattern here.

 if you look that was a that's a very that's a very clear.

 but then if you look at the axis you say, that's only a 500 difference.

If we get,, 4000 plus or -4000, the errors are a lot higher than the seasonal component.

 maybe that's not a real seasonal component.

Or if it is, it's very steep because we've got very high in case or if you want to start this is another is actually accounted for in a good sense.

Yes. Exactly. Yes. Because the magnitude of this one versus we I'm sure you find out what's going on.. Those who work on. It just doesn't feel.

That, I think is easy for me... Great. Thank you., actually,, happy holidays.. And when they tend to the collection, the answerphone., I don't know if she's us, but,,, we found it., I,, this is,, this is,, that we generated on the on the.

Cool. this is,, but,, this data is in indexation,

 it's using API calls to get,, GP, for I'm going to treat this yes stuff here.

But, example is the focus difference unsupervised learning.

 I can if I start to type in learning.., you can actually I guess the ability, gives me a hot code and in percentage,

and it forces me to actually write if I'm writing about,, concepts or I know what I'm writing., it gives me that direction. I'm not learning.,. Labeled. it's going to take a look at as you're jumping in.

Oh. Cool. I get in the neighborhood..,. But if you say, I don't know, I started arguing with,.

I'll give you a call.. You will,,.

Radio free., I see that., you needed stuff.., but,, if I choose to practice and learning with., you see, they actually also helping me with that Socratic response..,,., cool., I that. And set out to guide you in the direction.

It's actually.. give some more guidance.

And in the practice mode, you can also,, just if I really don't remember, I can actually just choose.. Or I can go refresher, I can ask this has the context of the whole place and, plus the question.. Yes. I can,, I don't get it., I'll give you that. And. where is it coming or where does that data come from to create the questions again., I generated this questions this ML fundamentals I got,,.

Just giving me,, give me what you think is,, for that., it's not just drawing on that.,. But I have some other different questions.,. I see here I have,, 100,, questions for this quiz.. Cool. Seven and I think. And then eight and then the same thing.. Practice mode.

I can type and give me a hot, cold and warm and,, and a Socratic,, response to ask questions to guide me in their response.. Or I can choose,, if I really remember, choose something or I can ask.. And is a unique one. And this is a chrome extension.

 how come a chrome extension versus a web app or something. Because it's just easier for me to a prototype.

And because it's also gives me a shortcut that I can just, I don't need to publish anywhere.

Just,, just on my browser and any allows me to navigate if I'm studying or have I here.. Guiding the learning process I can actually. this is cool.

Very cool. I it... It's just for your own self-study or you're gonna do something with it.. I'm just,, and just working on an idea to help me learn it.,. Very cool.. Some other projects,. And, canvas just keeps me focused on what I need to do, this week, today.

And,, this is another Chrome extension that I've been I've been exploring I increment sections because, gives me augmented.. Capabilities for,. That's true as a canvas for example.

It's it's hard if I don't actually know what they need to do in the week.. And be for all the classes. Really took me to one of them.. And this.

 this is just grabbing them from the from the you say you're navigating to, from the canvas API or just grabbing from that... It's using the credentials that I'm already in.. I didn't know you had. Do you have an API key for canvas that they give that to students.. for my capstone at northeastern I actually have this configured with API keys because I was able to create the API with Duke.. Allow me to create.. I ended up using the same I actually figure out that you can actually reach

the API with the browser adventures with the Octoprint with the SSL credentials.. All.. you can reach the API from canvas with the SSL connection.. The slash API in whatever., all.

It doesn't allow me to create API keys. Basically allows me to actually reach API to make API calls.. that's that.. Oh, interesting...

Huh... how do you do.

 you authenticate through the thrill of through it through your app or how do you how do you do it then.

Exactly.. I,, I this, it requires me to be,, having the since this is using my section.. From this,, it requires me to actually have the canvas open..,,, if I close it, and I, I said, open.

It's actually opens automatically. I configure to have an automatic I was going to break next.. And it's using a browser session. It exhausted all the data.. that's very cool... I was trying to, maybe I'm going to merge goes through,, I can maybe grab the content from the cluster directly from the canvas.. Generate the quizzes and actually have,, five interface.. I don't know if because now I this isolation.,, I'm working on both., if it makes sense or not. Merge.,, you need to think about that.., you could be if you have..

Different to the different apps that you can toggle into one or the other one., I that.,. That you grab the,, all the, all the assignments.

And to do that you have to you then do you have to navigate to each course in the browser and then it grabs it out.

No, it grabs it via API. you can actually grabs all the elements and grabs all the identities.. The only requirement is having the canvas page open and which.

Is able to look out here.

This of course is that or you have to do actually look up and everything in here is the name is there's nothing it's not a different..

The only structure I know there's I think actually after you was trained up to know if had it's options that are can hide courses.

 I do I think social media campaigns for second and third year in general.

That's impressive. I didn't realize you could you could get in there.. I think in these classes., yes.. There's some me. I know you might to focus on the assignments.,, I'm getting content. You can actually just search on the policies.. This is Mark,, and I., that would be good.. But looks they're trying to look.

 that online document convenience. But it is a way to publish.

Other. Yes. I'm going to see to make sure you have this I.

Know, I know, I know, I know I'm.

Just going to have to listen to it.

I need to know how. To fight this topic., I guess... That's good. I.

Think. Oh,...,.

That's. Everything.

 what I would.

Imagine. what I don't know.

What that means, I think what needs to happen....,.

Very cool.,, I didn't know.

That,, that's,..

That's what... Oh,.

You should think about them.,. Oh, you can tell by the all together.. And I have,. Oh,, I know I spent a few minutes one day in class reacting to this reaction.

We looked at but a lot of.,.,, even if you want to do that, we can actually, you got to go. I love the.

Way you chana masala. He's a good.

Guy.,, I think he's going to be happy.. That's terrible.

But that's sweet. Oh I know.

Oh thank you cookie. This is very civilized.

Hold it up, please. I want you to make. One of their specials.

That's why you should go in and say whatever you.

Or I can go in there., let's get rid of that.

That's what I should get. we're going to do a little activity now,, to get some hands on,, practice with this.,,., and the answer to that is,,, it depends on how easy it is to, to figure out the seasonality,

because that's really the key a key component to make this work.. if you can,, figure that out using your human judgment or consult with a domain expert to understand that,

or it's relatively straightforward to visualize it, then you can probably do a pretty good job using an approach this., if it's not obvious either visually or by talking to somebody what the seasonality is,

what features degrade because you don't know what the seasonality is or how many seasonal components there might be or what the lags are., other than just a lot of trial and error, it would be tough to build an effective model.

 in that case, you would likely be better off going with a more complicated model that just can handle that for you., if we think, a good example of that might be thinking about equity is pricing,.

 the pricing of stocks,, if it were easy that we could just,,,, we could just build each build our own model to predict the prices and trade on that and,, make lots of money.

 obviously it can't be that easy., and it's debatable actually whether there's any seasonality in equities pricing or not.

 if anyone's interested in trading use,, there's lots of papers taking different sides of that., but, if there is a seasonality component in equities pricing, it's not at all obvious.

And trying to use this an approach is probably not going to work very.

 for that we need something more powerful. we need a model that's capable of processing sequences.

 maybe an Lstm,, CNNs, even, a transformer model to try to uncover some potentially hidden,, or correlations in.. in this exercise is in the repo I put it in last night.

 you, you may have to grab it,, if it's not showing up,, on what you've pulled previously.,, I mentioned this used to be part of the final exam.

I took it back when I taught 510., and this is the situation we're gonna work on this for,, what's called a Capital Bikeshare,

which is the bike sharing system in Washington, DC, as I may ever use that record.,. Service. Remember the idea of a bikeshare system generally,.

You have different stations with those bikes often.

And then you can take one and just use it and drop it off at another station there.. the scooter share. And some, some of them, they work on stations, others work.

Just you can drop it wherever. Then you when you want to find, when you look on the map and figure out where one is., and,.

we have enough space to support the crowds of people that are going to want to,, ride bikes and go by bike around the city., we're going to use a linear regression model. just we've been discussing in class,, but what we need to do is create that model.

 figure out what the features are for the., you get your weekend in two different CSV files.

The first one is,, some,, bike share information from 2011 2012., it's got it's very simple. it's got three columns a date, an hour and a count of total bikes that,, were used., the second file is a,,, CSV file containing weather information., the time period is the same., it's organized by day and hour, just the first one.

And it's got some weather information. it's got,,, variable called weather center, which is weather situation.

And that's a, that's A12, that's a one, two, 3 or 4 value depending on the weather condition.., and,, you've got an explanation here.

What is clear to you on this cloudy light snow.

Heavy rain., probably not a lot of people,, biking around when it's three or especially four., you got the weather situation,, temperature.,, for an actual temperature, it feels temperature, humidity, wind speed., and you've got a bunch of different potential,, useful information there for you., what you're going to do is try to build,, you're going to take this information and try to build a model,,, that,,, can effectively model the demand for bikes., and,, you're going to run this to download the data, set up the regression model., you're going to go through, load the data, clean it.

Are there are the outliers or erroneous values., I think that I think I may have intentionally thrown in some,, some odd values.

 you may want to check and see where and see what's in there and figure out how you're going to handle those., we're going to you're allowed to use,, all the data up to and including July 31st, 2012 as a training set.

And then you're going to you're going to use August 1st, December 31st as your test set.. And we're going to that measure performance on your test set. you're going to do some feature engineering.

Figure out what features you want to use. optionally do a feature selection., and then you're going to run your pipeline., if all goes.

And we're going to measure your output here based on MSI., if all goes, you should have an MSI below 18,500 on the,, on the test set., it may be significantly below that. I seen scores as low as, 10,000 and maybe 9000 or., if you're above 18,500, that means there's probably room for improvement., in which. Get.,, I don't know., we're going to give this,. 35 minutes here., and we'll get we're going to do a third probably 30 minutes.

And then I want to make sure we have enough time to talk about a project,, before we break here.

 we'll give this 30 minutes.,, we'll see if anybody's going to finish.

We'll see how quickly you got it done and how many folks are able to finish in 30 minutes.

Don't stress if you're not., what I would suggest.,, as far as an approach here is,,,

you can get hung up and spent a lot of time looking at those whether features and whether they're useful or not and which ones are useful.

 you might you might start by using or using, only a time series model.

 using only the past in that and looking at potential correlations from the past.. logically, we can expect that,, the demand on any given day,, some function of,, things the,, demand,,,, a week ago,, the demand,,, the same day the previous year, etc.., you can expect to see some correlations that., maybe demand may be a function of,, day of the week, might be a function of the hour of the day.. There's probably a daily,, seasonality to it., probably not a lot of people.. It breaks at midnight on the Tuesday night.

Maybe there are a lot of people riding bikes at £0.05 pm on a, on a Thursday going on or,, there are logical,, potential,, seasonality components to it on a, on a daily basis, on a weekly basis, maybe,, on an annual basis, maybe,, that you can use.

 before you spend any time really,, unless you're really motivated to try to jump into reading or weather that and,,

I would suggest maybe just start with,, a simple time series model with either one or multiple,, seasonality factors and see what you can get with that., and then if you get that done, then go back and try to add in some weather features and see and see what they do into your model.

It is just for fun and practice. don't stress about the yes questions.

Sure.. You can use whatever you want.. This is I said, not graded.

 in this particular case you can do whatever you want with I,., with the go ahead.. It is in any capacity.. I would prefer that you,.,, the squared error. This might get boring if you just use.

If you just. It's an agent to write this for you, try to do the coding yourself.

Used. I how ideas or syntax or.

I'm just wondering because I to use your you.. We're trying to try to do the coding. I didn't quite get it I can I do not sure.. Afterwards if you want to run it through code or something for fun and see how God does on it.. I could knock yourself out. All., if you have any questions as we go, just come up and ask.

 oh. I was going to mention, too,, this is for fun.

 you can either work by yourself or if you prefer to work with a partner or something, you're welcome to do that too.,, either pick a partner or just by yourself, whether you prefer.

And,, we'll,, we're going to compete for bragging rights.

 if anybody for those who finish in 30 minutes, whoever has the lowest MSE is our,, our weather for the day.

All. Good luck. And by the way, the flight data example we just looked at is in the repos,

if you want to use that as an example, look at the code for how we did that.. It's fine. it's going to give.

Us...,., the,.. There are a couple of things you can do.

 you can. You can run it's dash, which is.

If you,,, if you, you probably know if I haven't committed you here in the villages.... And my.., you might have.., actually, that is it.

The other simple thing is,. Not sure how.

It's. And... This is.

It's., firstly, I would you.

To. Propose., if you close out, the easiest thing to do would be,, just grabbing an issue, just grabbing it from the,, instead of going for just fruits.

And putting them in., alternatively, you can also just you can just clone the entire thing., again, if this. Is a war.

And,, exercise. Equipment.

 here. And then you can just think that this is all I.., if we make other, other things, you may,.. Do you still have,.

The issue is,..

You may have worked on some file. And then I did something, some power changing in some weights, and now it doesn't., it doesn't want to just remove or write your local changes.. it doesn't know which one to keep your which is the local username.

That's why I asked you automatically. Unnecessarily.

 everything. No I didn't. It's just a function of how it works to protect yourself that you don't overwrite.

 if you did a bunch of stuff locally, you don't want to just overwrite., I agree with that.

By replacing those files with changes that I made, which is why it's giving you that.. Yes.

 you have a couple of options that keep it simple. you just download the additional one and move them into your file.

You could you can click on the entire thing again,, and have it keep one copy and it's stays consistent with the one I put up.

And then you get a separate copy for yourself. And then, that's an alternative to that.

And the receiving versions you could do., because if you get clone this and then you do it in a different places,

you don't change anything or you can just pull it each time and it's not going to work issues now.

 things if you want to keep one version on your laptops in my repo and keep a separate version, that's your own working version where you.

Have,,, we can either do that or you will have.

The reality is that the other thing is that you can do something.

You can just download it to your own version. I think I might do that for now.

Sure... You either. Either ways is fine.

Is doing a lot of I think, I said, there should be a lot of changes in that.

Most of, adding a couple of files that you can download on your own., and then you can also if you, if you wanted, if you go back to click on.

You can also at any time you can..

You're not a download. You can download the entire.

And. I and know that the entire thing is, that's a,, as if.

She said..

And then you just grab a fresh copy and then just take what you can out of it.. See it's, it's it's only a couple of files.

You just have to go to the file, download it, just add it into your. And I can see the why.. Need.. Just need a notebook and it..

Don't worry about the data files because when you run out of course nothing your master plan.

It's completely... Just because I want to check on this, I wanted to pretend I always have some.

You're not doing healthy reason.

I don't. Think I want.

To. Those lyrics were also spoken.

I'm pretty sure..

You got what you're gonna need. You're going to need both rights. You're gonna be the next train.

Next test. My train test., and you can you go up.

You can said that, however, it was most logical for you to do that.

You did this. Split it.. Time was to have a train to test.

And then you also eventually you an accident.

Pretty sure that this train is. And.

For a slower growth.. Oh.

This the problem with. What do.

Which brings us the responses from multiple people.,, the our this is the audition temperature., feels time and wind speed., you have.

The why is the,, the counter bikes, which is only in the first CSP.

 do. what you'd want to do if you're going to use the weather you want.

I want to merge that into the density.

 through. The water because I don't.

Work. Six hours a. Open.

Over. thanks.

 much. For being here.

I think it's working. I think it's.

And the increasing. Order can be solved., we can help., you do something to.

Your preference. Otherwise, there is an internet problem.. Times.

I do not. I was just.

To pretend... We have to about this every morning., you don't really want to know, because.

He keeps calling you smarty. And that's where we are.

Except. My doctor.

I think we. All have routines and things that we.

Don't. Oh.

Of course.. Oh,.

Oh,. Might to get that in the chat.

Let's go. Let's go.

Let me do. My.

Responsibilities. Thank you. It has nothing to.. Year. We're.

For..

This. Until it was.

Last you..

We. You can see that.

Oh my goodness. Is every single one.

Of the bills recording the online version of.

It's not.,, kind I was.. Compared to ten. Years ago.

What we're looking at is that and the. Other thing too, for independent thinking through revivalism.. Professor.. Time. The difference between the time, I don't know, check up with the topic with meetup was it feels charity is there.., as a kid, I did. I just need to read more.

That's sometimes the feeling..

Over to the. Here.

Are. You can't.. You time with all of.

You. This.

But we. Would also.

Approval. And.

And. For instance.

All,, we're getting a few minutes. That's.

Just. Question..... That's what you said.. I think it doesn't cause injuries.

I don't think.., there are some statistical testing on, and you can use a pretty good determination.. I guess the regression comes through that. But then at the end of the day, that can be helpful.. That was just a decision I on whether you,,,

whether they're covered or around the values or whether,, whether those are actual.

I guess our this is,, the context of all the other temperature values,

this that stands out to you, the relative to the temperature,, the hour before, the hour after.

It's pretty unlikely that the temperature is going to drop that much in one hour and go back up the next hour.

It usually doesn't happen.,, and for that reason, I would probably say these are, run these values.

And I would either remove these or normalize these.

Oh, yes...

We're going to put a pause on that exercise debris get through it.. All. Your,,, your test done before next week is to finish up,, what you've been working on., next week at the beginning of class, we'll, we'll go around and we'll compare and we'll see who is able to achieve the,, the lowest MSQ.

Maybe I'll come up with a little prize or something.,, please finish that up and be prepared to,, to share., next week,, whoever does get the lowest, they'll probably want to ask to explain,, their solution, how they did it.,, be prepared for that as..,, because that happens to be you.,, in the meantime, again, feel free.

This is a fun it's not going to be graded, but I do want you to do it.

 again, if you want to team up or something that or anyone get some help or ask questions from me or the day or,, a friend, that's totally fine to do.,, finish that up for next week and,, and we'll go around the room next week and see,,

see how,, there are, by the way, that there's no or wrong answer to this.

There is a better or worse answers to it., we'll see how it goes., and I could if we,, I could show you a sample solution., I want to make sure we get this in today.

That's why I'm wrapping. Wrapping it up now with the exercise., very briefly.

And we can take questions on it next week as.,, we're going to kick off project one today.,, it's going to be due October 8th for the change we just made to the syllabus to get, I think, four weeks to do it.

All.,, it's going to be a weather,, prediction project.

 your task is to predict the hourly temperature as measure that,, are the airports,,

for the period starting at the beginning of the date, Melbourne's,, September 17th today., midnight last night, all the way up to 11 p.m. will be your final prediction on September 30th.. it's a two week period. You're going to make a prediction for every single hour for the predicted temperature during that hour.., here's the rules.

You can use any data as long as it's from prior to last night.. you can use whatever, whatever you want.,, that means you can use all the historical data you want from any source you want., you can also use other models. as you all know, there's lots of,, forecasting models out there, but,, a lot of the major,,

I shouldn't say that,, there are several countries that have their own government forecasting models, including the US., the I Europe as a as a model., you're allowed to use the outputs of those models.

 if you want to use the predictions of those models,, as part of your inputs for your model, you're welcome to do that.

You can use one. You can use multiple,, whatever you.

You can create whatever features you want. you can approach this as a time series if you want., and you can use some of what we talked about today. look at is a very logical time series,.,, temperature fluctuation through the day,, see if there's some seasonality.,, you can approach it as a time series, you can,, approach it a different way.

You can you can,,

treat it as an ensemble problem where you go and get five government forecast models and you figure out a good way to ensemble.

 now in some it's combine or,, and take a weighted combination of the outputs of those models.., you can use any models you want.

However, I want you to do it,, to at least two ways.

And I want you to show the results of both of those ways. One is using a linear regression model the inputs can be whatever you want.

But the model has to be a linear regression, what we're doing today.., it doesn't have to be a time series. Can be a, an ensemble or something., two is,, you have to use one other model.

 one,,, non linear regression model., what that is, is up to you. you can use one of the algorithms we talked about in this class.

Or you can use something else. if you want to use transformer model or something that, you're welcome to, to do that., totally up to you. lots of flexibility in how we approach this., you're going to work in teams of three. I should have mentioned that.,, assign teams,, just because I want to force you to get to know some people that you don't already know,

get a chance to work with them,, generate three.

Depending on how the numbers come out, we may have some teams of 1 to 2., one thing to do.. We'll see.., the deliverables for the project. there are three parts to it., one is your presentation. we're going to present these in class., it's going to be a ten minute max presentation., things you should talk about. you should talk about what inputs you used and why,, what your data pipeline was..,, it's an end to end modeling task I mentioned to cover all those things in your presentation., secondly, you'll have a code repo, you need to submit all the code that you used.

It should be,, structure. That should be clean. It should be documented.,, and then number three and you'll do a write up and there's not a,, there's not an upper or lower limits.

I, I'd say 2 to 4 pages that are feels reasonable to me.., I'm not going to penalize you if you go,, more than four.

If you've already gone there, probably shouldn't go in there too.

And,, and in the write up, I want you,, to focus more on how did you approach this problem.

 what we're the key decisions that you took., and also, how did you bring in some of the things we're learning in class to help you,,

make those decisions about where they get data from, about what features to use, about what algorithms to use, about what evaluation metric to use.. There's lots of decisions that this is a very open ended thing.

I'm not specifying any of that. you have lots of decisions to make.

 what I want to see in the write up is what was your thought process in making those decisions., I know you said we could use any data., except for the inputs and the outputs or just the words.

Sure it can be the inputs and outputs.. Anything you want.

As long as long as it's prior to last night. Midnight., I'm just curious, how we're testing performance just because,,

You don't want to. You don't want to use the test set in your modeling process.. the test set for us in this case is September 17th.

The second or third.. we're not going to touch that data until the end until we've finished all of our,

you probably want to come up with some validation approach.. maybe you,, choose to create a validation set that's September 1st to September 16th or something that.. And that's going to be your validation set. And you're going to use that in your,,, your modeling process.. eventually,, eventually, I do want you to run the test set through your model and report on the outcome.. when I, when I talk about reporting performance, I'm talking about reporting performance on this test set of the 17th and third., you will eventually use the test set, but you shouldn't do that until the very end.., the reason why I'm ending September 30th is,

and it's due October 8th is you then still have a week between the 30th and the eighth to take the model you built,

and then run the test, set through it and then look at the performance of it up here, up your report in your presentation.

 make sense. All.
