Calculate similarity between embeddings
56
Text Summarization
Extractive summarization
Select a subset of sentences from the original text that attempt to retain the most important points of the document
All elements come from original document
Abstractive summarization
Attempts to understand original document and then attempt to generate a shorter document which retains the key points of the original
May use different language than original document
57
Text Summarization
Web page summaries
Email summaries
Scientific article summaries
Video transcription summaries
58
Text Summarization
Extractive Example
TextRank uses an unsupervised graph-based approach to identifying and extracting the most “central” sentences in a document
59
Text Summarization
Abstractive Example
We can use transformer models pre-trained on a summarization dataset or train them ourselves
Note that larger documents must be broken into sequences with a max length dictated by the model architecture
60
Topic Modeling
Can be useful to “tag” documents based on topics or attributes
Applications:
Auto-tagging of web articles
Unsupervised document classification
Identifying attributes in product reviews
Auto-tagging customer support tickets
61
Topic Modeling
Methods
Supervised - if sufficient labeled training data is available
Unsupervised -
[Traditional] Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)
[Traditional] Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
Transformer embeddings
62
Topic Modeling
Could assume the topic’s keywords are contained in the document
Which words are the right keywords? Oh, you can do a spring. It's very boring., I don't them. I some engagement., would be good. By our first word two vectors dot product score one. You have those two different sequences that you want words to attend to each other in those two different sequences. We've got our scaled dot product attention here, which is what we saw on the last slide and what we've been talking about. I was. We decide that we want to use an indifferent embedding model than the one used previously to determine the best chunking approach. And the record is in,, group chat model..,, we would definitely use that train for our.,, you can go in and it might have been an 11 judge approach. But I'm, oh man. Oh wait. Top of every page before I go on. And you're saying there's a there is a correlation, but it's not the reason I was not able to open or it's not that. or being rebuilt??